==== PART bk2-p5 ====
RAW_LABEL: PART 5. VOLUME PROFILE


---- SECTION bk2-c23 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.1 AUCTION MARKET THEORY + VOLUME PROFILE
5.1 AUCTION MARKET THEORY + VOLUME PROFILE The Volume Profile uses the principles of auction theory
to put it intopractice and to visualize the areas of interest on the chart. Interest issimply
measured by the activity that has been generated in a particularzone; and this activity is
identified by the volume traded. This tool will therefore help us to identify the zones of greater
andlesser interest and will help us to evaluate the price when interacting withthem in order to
determine whether acceptance or rejection is takingplace. All these principles are based on the
premise that the market has amemory and tends to repeat behavior. It is therefore expected that in
thefuture certain areas will again behave in the same way as they did in thepast. One caution to
keep in mind is that the market's memory isprimarily short term. This means that more recent trading
zones are moreimportant than older ones. If the price initiates an imbalance the first zoneto be
taken into account will be the most immediate previous balancezone. The longer the price has been
away from a certain acceptance area,the less significant it will be. If we have no other reference,
it will still beuseful to value it, but it is important to be aware that the most
immediateequilibrium zones will most likely be the ones that the market will lookfor in the first
instance since they are the ones that best represent the valueat the present moment.


---- SECTION bk2-c24 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.2 VOLUME PROFILE COMPOSITION
5.2 VOLUME PROFILE COMPOSITION Volume profiles are visually observed on the chart as a
horizontalhistogram where their values are distributed according to the trading ateach price level.
Depending on the number of contracts traded at each price level,the shape of the distribution will
vary. The more trades, the longer thelength of the horizontal line; while a short horizontal line
represents littletrading. As a reference we will take a normal or Gaussian Bell distributionto
understand the most important statistical concepts:
[FIG 093]
❖ The data are symmetrically distributed with respect to the central point where mean, median and
mode coincide. ❖ It has three standard deviations on each side, which are equally spaced and measure
the amount of variability or dispersionaround an average. It is also a measure of volatility. ❖ The
first standard deviation comprises 68.2% of the data and up to the second deviation it reaches
95.4%.
[FIG 094]
This real example is in the form of a normal distribution where thevalues are distributed up and
down around the central point. The data are organized by a vertical axis on which the price
islocated and a horizontal axis representing the volume variable. The value area is determined
between the Value Area High (VAH)and the Value Area Low (VAL), is part of the first standard
deviation andrepresents exactly 68.2% of the total volume traded in that profile. It is themost
traded area of the profile and is therefore considered the area ofacceptance. The volume traded
outside the value area comprises the remaining31.8%. This is the least traded area of the profile
and is thereforeconsidered a rejection area. The high and low levels of the value area (VAH and VAL)
will actas support and resistance areas as some interaction is expected abovethem. The breadth of
the value area leaves clues about market conditions.A wide Value Area suggests that there is a large
participation of alltraders, everyone is buying and selling at the prices they want; while anarrow
Value Area is a sign of low activity. This is the highest (High) and lowest (Low) price reached in
thatprofile. These price levels should always be viewed as key referencepoints. Depending on the
trading generated at these extremes we canconsider that they represent finished or unfinished
auctions. Finished auction. It is visually observed with a decreasingnegotiation towards the end. It
represents a lack of interest as the price reaches price levels further away from the value zone,
finally suggesting aclear rejection of the market to trade in that zone. By its very nature it is
aLow Volume Node. Prices have reached a point where some traders have considered itas an
advantageous opportunity and have entered causing this rejection.The lack of participation from the
opposite side is represented by thisdecrease in volume. It appears as a High Volume Node on the end
of the profile.Implicitly it represents interest to negotiate in this zone and thereforesuggests a
later visit of the price in case it has previously moved awayfrom it. In the future visit it will be
necessary to evaluate the intentionbehind it since it could develop with the objective of finishing
the auctionand turning around, or with the objective of continuing trading andcontinuing in that
direction.
[FIG 095]
This concept of finished or unfinished auction can be very usefulbecause if, for example, we are
assessing the possibility of the priceleaving an equilibrium zone upwards, we will want to see that
at thebottom of that zone there is a finished auction that would suggest a lack ofinterest in
trading there. In case of observing a possible unfinished auctionit would be convenient to
quarantine the scenario since it is most likelythat before starting the upward movement there will
be a visit of the pricein that low part with the objective of testing the interest in that zone.
[FIG 096]
When in doubt as to whether we are in a possible finished orunfinished auction, it is advisable to
treat it as finished. Unfinishedauctions should be very visual and should not be involved in
muchsubjectivity. Generally we are going to observe them as an abnormal cutin the distribution of
the profile and in many occasions it will coincidewith one of the two limits of Value Area.
[FIG 097]
In Market Profile this concept is totally objective: an unfinishedauction (Poor High & Poor Low)
appears at one end where at least twoTPOs are observed; in other words, a finished auction will be
representedwith a single TPO at the price level (Single Print). This is the level of highest volume
concentration in that profile. Itrepresents the price most accepted by both buyers and sellers
(fairer) andsets the level from which the value area is calculated. Since most of the volume comes
from large institutions, this iswhere these large traders have accumulated most of their positions.
Theygenerally accumulate contracts in a range of prices but the VPOCrepresents a benchmark as it
identifies where the most interest is. As it is a level that will attract a lot of trading, it is
generallyadvisable to avoid trading in its vicinity. The broad consensus amongparticipants will
cause fluctuations around this level. This behavior willcontinue until new information appears that
unbalances the participants'perception. The VPOC allows us to establish who is in control of the
market. Ifthe price is above it, we will determine that the buyers will be in control,so it would
make more sense to trade long; if it is below it, the sellers willbe in control, so trading short
would be a better option. Keep in mind that the VPOC, by its very nature, will always be aHigh
Volume Node, but not all High Volume Nodes will be VPOCs. If there is one level widely used by large
institutions it is VWAP.Huge transactions seek to execute at the price level where the VWAP isfound
and that is why it has elevated its level of importance. The VWAP represents the average price of
all contracts tradedduring a particular time period. The formula for obtaining it is as follows: ❖
No. of contracts traded * price of the asset / Total contracts traded To understand it a little
better, we can say that above the VWAPthere is the same volume traded as below it, i.e. it
represents an importantequilibrium level. This equilibrium means that when the price reaches theVWAP
there is the same probability that the price will go up or down. It is displayed on a chart like a
traditional moving average and itsposition varies as trades are executed. Generally, depending on
the tradingstyle, the VWAP of the session, the weekly or the monthly is used. The VWAP is used by
institutional traders primarily as an averageto determine the value of the asset at that point in
time so they considerthat they have bought low if the price is below and high if it is above.
Institutions have taken the VWAP as a reference measure withwhich to judge the quality of their
executions, hence its relevance and thefact that we treat it as an important trading level.
[FIG 098]
When they receive an order, they do not execute all the contractsthey need at one time, but will try
to do so gradually, knowing that theirwork will be judged on the basis of this reference level.
Since it represents an important equilibrium level or fair price, it isa good measure of whether we
are buying too high or selling too low. Wecan tell this by adding one or two standard deviations to
the mean. Justbecause the price is at some standard deviation does not mean that itcannot continue
to move in that direction, we could simply use it as onemore footprint to add to our analysis. But
be very careful because everything is subject to the valuation ofthe market at that moment. In a
market in balance a price below theVWAP will be considered cheap and a price above it expensive; but
justas the market becomes unbalanced to one side or the other the VWAP nolonger represents
efficiency as now the perception of value has changed. Depending on the time frame we can make use
of different levels ofVWAP. The most commonly used are the session VWAP for intradaytraders and the
weekly and monthly VWAP for medium and long termtraders. High volume nodes. These are zones that
represent balance andhigh level of interest by all market participants as both buyers and
sellershave been comfortable trading there. It is observed as peaks in the volumeprofile.
[FIG 099]
Although we have used a composite profile for this example, the fundamentals are equally valid and
applicable to all profiles. Past balance zones act as magnets attracting the price and keeping
itthere. As in the past there was some consensus between buyers andsellers, in the future exactly
the same is expected to happen. That is whythey are very interesting areas for target setting.
Different High Volume Nodes can be identified within the sameprofile. Low Volume Nodes. These are
areas that representimbalance/rejection. Neither buyers nor sellers have been comfortabletrading and
therefore are considered in some way "unfair" prices. Theyare observed as valleys in the volume
profile. As in the past there was no consensus, it is expected that in thefuture there will be no
consensus either and cause some rejection, so theyare interesting areas of support and resistance
where to look for potentialentries. It is important to understand that rejection can be represented
by theprice in two ways:
[FIG 100]
V-TURN The perception of the value has not changed with respect to theprevious equilibrium zone and
there is a rejection to trade at these levels.The market turns completely around to re-enter the
previous zone inwhich buyers and sellers feel comfortable trading. What triggers this price reaction
is firstly the placement of passiveorders waiting above that area to block the move, coupled with
asubsequent aggression that confirms the V-turn and return to the previousvalue area. Visually it
may be observed in the price as prominent wicks at theends of the candlesticks which will suggest
such rejection. Participants' perception of value has changed and is represented inthe price by a
violent movement. The market, based on the newinformation, rejects trading at these LVN levels and
moves quicklythrough them. Technically, what causes this rapid movement is, on the one hand,the
execution of stop loss orders by those who are positioned on theopposite side; and on the other
hand, the activation of momentumstrategies that activation of momentum strategies that enter
aggressivelywith market orders. Visually, it will be observed on the chart with wide
rangecandlesticks generally accompanied with high volume. As with HVNs, more than one Low Volume
Node can be displayedwithin the same profile.


---- SECTION bk2-c25 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.3 TYPES OF PROFILES
5.3 TYPES OF PROFILES The volume profile is a tool that can be adapted according to theoperator's
needs. The main difference when using one type of profile or another willbe determined by the
trader's timeframe and the context he needs to coverin his analysis. Basically we can differentiate
three types of profiles: This type is very versatile. Its peculiarity is that it allows us tolaunch
profiles manually on any particular price action. It is especially useful for identifying trading
zones in two types ofcontexts: trend movements and ranges.
[FIG 101]
If we see a bearish movement we can launch a profile of the wholemomentum to identify the
interesting zones over which the price is likelyto make some kind of bullish pullback. It is in
those trading zones wherewe want to be prepared to evaluate the possibility of entering in favor
ofthe trend. In the example we see how the price makes a test to the VPOCof the bearish momentum and
from there it generates a turn that causesthe development of a new bearish movement. If what we have
is a context of lateralization, a structure of thosewe work under the Wyckoff methodology approach,
the profile will comein handy to identify mainly where is the VPOC that determines the marketcontrol
and the value zone with its extremes (VAH and VAL). These willbe very interesting to take into
account in order to look for the test afterthe breakout of the structure, as in the following
example.
[FIG 102]
Unlike the other types of profiles, the fixed range is not updatedand only analyzes the volume
traded in the area to be determined. Regardless of whether you are going to work with structures or
notunder the Wyckoff methodology approach, it is very useful to pull profilesthat encompass several
sessions in case we see an overlap between theirvalue areas. If we see more than one session
generating value over acertain price range, it is best to launch a profile that includes all the
priceaction, since the operating levels that such a profile can provide us withwill have by their
very nature a greater relevance. This is the profile of the day. It is especially useful for
intradaytrading where the most important trading zones of the session are takeninto account. It
ranges from the beginning to the end of the session and isupdated as the day progresses.
[FIG 103]
Shorter-term traders use both the levels of the session and those ofprevious sessions to make their
scenarios. If we are observing a bullish movement and a subsequentlateralization of the price, it
would be interesting to look for theincorporation in favor of the trend movement on some operative
level. Aswe know, the most important level of the whole profile is the VPOC sowe must take it into
account to wait for our entry trigger on it.
[FIG 104]
Continuing with this same example, another interesting area onwhich to look for a test after a
breakout could be an operating area ofprevious sessions. If we are above the value area of the
previous session, the first operating level on which to expect a test to look for the
bullishcontinuation will be the Value Area High of the profile of the previoussession. Originally
the profiles were displayed only by sessions and thisidea of grouping them was introduced by Donald
L. Jones in his book"Value-Based Power Trading" in what he called "The Overlay DemandCurve". The
objective was to try to eliminate the noise of the shorter termand thus get a better understanding
of the market condition, of the context. This type of profile can be set up in two ways: ❖ Fixed.
Within the fixed mode we have the possibility to select the range of dates we want to include in the
profile analysis. Youmay want to know the profile for the past week, the past month orthe current
year, this mode is designed for this particularrequirement. ❖ Variable. The variable mode has the
important peculiarity that it shows the traded volume of all price levels that are currently onthe
chart. It is important to keep this in mind because if the chartis moved, the profile will change.
The best use of this type of profile, regardless of the time frame inwhich we are trading, is to
analyze the overall context and identify thetrading zones (mainly the high and low volume nodes)
that we have bothabove and below the current price.
[FIG 105]
These zones will serve to indicate the bias of the market in a moremacro context as well as for the
establishment of possible zones where tolook for entries and exits. If for example we are working on
a structure, it is very interestingto analyze the profile of the Composite to identify the longest
term HighVolume Nodes on which to establish targets for profit taking. Another use could be to
identify in the macro context a large LowVolume Node and to encourage the development of a shock on
it. Wecould be working a potential cumulative structure. If when analyzing thecontext we identify an
LVN relatively close to the structure, it would beinteresting to take into account the possibility
of the Spring that generatesthe imbalance of the structure.


---- SECTION bk2-c26 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.4 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL VOLUME
5.4 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL VOLUME Many who look with some suspicion at the
Volume Profile allude that it isnot necessary to incorporate this type of tool in order to be able
to makesolid analyses and approaches based on volume data. This is absolutely true; it is obvious
that there is absolutely nothingnecessary. The problem is that they fail to understand what kind
ofinformation they can acquire through their evaluation. The first thing that should be conveyed is
that the Volume Profilewas not developed as a substitute for the classic volume. They
providedifferent information and are therefore completely complementary. To really understand what
information is provided by volume data,it is necessary to examine it from two points of view: ❖
Volume in time: This is the classic volume that is observed vertically on the chart. It has to do
with the number of contractsexchanged within a certain period of time. It tells us when themajor
traders are active. ❖ Volume in price: This is the Volume Profile and is observed in the form of
horizontal bars. It indicates the number of contractstraded within a certain price level. It tells
us where the activity ofthe major traders has taken place. As we can see, both provide us with
different information about thesame action (professional activity), volume in time has to do with
when,while volume in price has to do with where. With the vertical volume we can know that during
the developmentof a particular candle a specific number of contracts have been traded, buthow has
the trading been distributed through the different price levels?This is the information that
horizontal volume gives us and that classicalvolume cannot. It is quite another matter if you need
to know thisinformation for your trading.
[FIG 106]


---- SECTION bk2-c27 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.5 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VOLUME PROFILE AND MARKET PROFILE
5.5 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN VOLUME PROFILE AND MARKET PROFILE The main difference between the two tools
is that the Market Profile isdesigned based on time, while the Volume Profile is designed based
onvolume.
[FIG 107]
The Market Profile represents the price data on the chart in letterformat, where each letter (called
TPO or Time Price Opportunity) isidentified with 30 minutes of trading. So, the letter A will
correspond tothe first 30 minutes after the opening of the session, the letter B to thenext 30
minutes and so on, adding letters and minutes until the end of theday. Traders who base their trades
on Market Profile analyze theopening of the day with respect to the value area of the previous day
andthe evolution of the Initial Balance (range that covers the first hour oftrading) to determine
the type of day that is likely to happen and proposescenarios based on this. It should be noted here
that some tradersdetermine the Initial Balance based on the first half hour only. Although Volume
Profile traders usually do not take the InitialBalance into account, the message it conveys can be
very interestingmainly because: ❖ The narrower its range, the greater the probability of a trending
day; and the wider the range, the greater the probability of asideways day. An interesting use that
MP offers us is the objective determinationof acceptance or rejection on a price level. While in
Volume Profile thiscan be shrouded in subjectivity, Market Profile analysis eliminates
thisdiscretionality: rejection is visualized by 1 TPO; while 2 or more TPOsbegin to represent
acceptance. The development of the distribution of the profiles of both toolswill tend to look quite
similar if both tools will tend to look quite similaralthough they will not be exactly the same.
This is obvious since they donot use the same data for their representation. An accumulation of TPOs
will indicate that the price has spent a long time at that level, while anaccumulation of volume
will tell us that a large number of contracts havebeen exchanged at that level. In Volume Profile,
as it is designed according to volume, the mosttraded level will not necessarily be the level where
the most time has beenspent; since the price may reach a level that in a few seconds accumulatesa
large number of orders and turns around (as in the example). The timethat the price will have spent
at that level is little but the volume traded isa lot so the Volume Profile POC will be at that
level while the MarketProfile POC will not.
[FIG 108]
Due to the current ecosystem of financial markets where theimportance of volume is highlighted, it
would seem more interesting touse the combination of price + volume (Volume Profile) rather than
price+ time (Market Profile). This is not to say that the time variable is unimportant or
lessimportant, nothing could be further from the truth. Obviously, time is akey element in
establishing where participants decide the value of aparticular market is at a particular moment in
time. The consumption oftime in a given area is an unquestionable sign of acceptance and
thereforevalue building.


---- SECTION bk2-c28 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.6 PROFILES SHAPES
5.6 PROFILES SHAPES As is obvious, the market will not always develop D-shaped profiledistributions
as this would mean that we are in an infinite equilibriumcontext. There is a lot of theory written
in Market Profile about the differenttypes of days based on the shape of the profile (normal day,
normalvariation, trend day, double-distribution trend day, non-trend day, neutralday, neutral day
extreme). The truth is that identifying the shape of such profiles to determinewhat kind of day we
have had may be valid for the human mind from thepoint of view that we always want to control
everything and need to lookfor a logic to every behavior; but from a trading point of view it does
notseem to be a very useful approach since the categorization is done by an aposteriori analysis.
Furthermore, over time evidence has been provided that it is notpossible to consistently predict
what type of day we are most likely tohave based solely on the previous day's categorization.
Steidlmayerhimself eventually acknowledged this. Unsurprisingly, it is impossible toknow what shape
the current session profile will have until the session has ended. It is exactly the same with the
labeling of events, phases andstructures under the Wyckoff methodology approach. It may be useful
forthe more novices to feed the subconscious with the various ways in whichthe market can represent
accumulations and distributions; but it is totallyuseless from an trading point of view as the
confirmation of all this isdone after the fact. It would therefore seem more sensible, for the
purpose of setting uptrading scenarios, to focus on identifying the creation of a value zone(range)
and to evaluate the price continuously as it interacts at itsextremes in order to identify
acceptance or rejection. The analytical toolsoffered by the Wyckoff methodology help us in
determining who is morelikely to be in control during the development of the range (buyers
orsellers) and therefore in which direction the path of least resistance lies. During the
development of the moves, profiles will be generatedand two very common ways in which trend and
sideways behavior isgraphically observed are the b and P patterns. These patterns represent the
first three phases of market activitythat Steidlmayer presented in his first studies and that by
Wyckoffmethodology we identify as Phases A and B of the development ofstructures.
[FIG 109]
These patterns will alert us to the halt of the previous trendmovement as well as the new
lateralization context. These two types ofprofiles show the same behavior but in both directions.
Firstly, in the lowprice zone the price moves with a certain fluidity developing the trendmovement
until it meets traders willing to trade in the opposite direction.At that point an equilibrium range
begins to develop, a zone of highparticipation that generates the profile bell. As long as the price
is during the trend movement, we should onlybe looking to trade in favor of that direction. We can
rely on thedeveloping VPOC and the rest of the operating levels. 5.6.1 P-SHAPE PROFILE
Characteristic of bullish movements and representative of futuredistributive and reaccumulation
schemes. This type of profile suggests strength on the part of buyers whohave had the ability to
push the price up with relative ease until it reachesa point where sellers begin to appear.
[FIG 110]
It is made up of two parts: a first one where the upward imbalanceis observed and a second one where
the market starts a rotation process(range). This is important to keep in mind because if such a
processoccurs in reverse (first a rotation and then a downtrend) visually we willstill see a P-type
profile with the big difference that it will have difficulttrading validity. All the concepts and
tools that are being proposed have anoperative sense; and in the case that concerns us with the P
and b patternsthey are only interesting if the last price action is the creation of newvalue (range)
since it will be from there where the next profitableimbalance will be generated. That is, if we are
at the end of the bearishmovement at the point of having already identified the P pattern in
mirror(with the imbalance to the right) completely, from the point of view ofoperating that
imbalance we may be too late and the most likely thing isthat the price will generate a new
equilibrium zone as the most immediateaction. On the contrary, if we have a theoretical P pattern
(with theimbalance to the left) we will be able to take advantage of the subsequenttrend movement
(which may be upward or downward).
[FIG 111]
Besides looking at it in isolation (session profiles), it is interestingto know that a longer-term
uptrend will be composed of several of theseprofiles in its internal development. In this case they
will simply bereaccumulative patterns that give rise to the continuous upwarddevelopment. In case
this type of profile appears after a prolonged downtrend, itcould alert us to the imminent end of
the downtrend at least temporarily.Here it is important again to note that it refers to see the
theoretical Ppattern; because if what we see is a mirror P pattern what we wouldactually have would
be a distribution and therefore the downtrend woulddenote strength. 5.6.2 b-SHAPE PROFILE
Characteristic of bearish movements and representative of future cumulative and redistribution
schemes. Individually, this type of profile signals an imbalance in favor ofsellers. Sellers are in
control and have pushed the price stronglydownwards until finally some participants appear buying
and a newrotation process is generated.
[FIG 112]
Within the context of a longer-term downtrend they will appearwith redistributive character being
excellent areas where to look forincorporation in the trend. As with the P pattern, the theoretical
type b is formed by a bearishimbalance as the first part and a value creation as the second. A
rotationfirst and a subsequent bullish imbalance would also appear visually with ab-shaped profile
but operationally we may not be able to take advantageof that first imbalance. On the other hand it
would also not have the sameimplications when analyzing the health of the preceding uptrend,
wherewhat we are looking for is upside rejection and value generation below.
[FIG 113]
In case of observing a b-shaped profile after a prolonged bullishmovement, it could signal the end
of such movement and sometimes thebeginning of a new one towards the bearish side.


---- SECTION bk2-c29 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.7 USES OF VOLUME PROFILE
5.7 USES OF VOLUME PROFILE This tool offers us totally objective information that fits perfectly
withinthe context provided by the principles of the Wyckoff methodology. Some of the most important
uses we can make are listed below. 5.7.1 IDENTIFYING STRUCTURES There will be occasions where the
delineation of the ends ofstructures will not be very visual, possibly because the price action
hasgenerated unclean movements. In this context it can be very useful to usethe Volume Profile to
pinpoint the high and low zones of the value area(VAH and VAL) assuming this area as the range that
is generating thecause of the subsequent movement. By their very nature, the upper and lower limits
of the structures wework with according to the Wyckoff methodology will always be lowtrading zones
(LVN). The price turns that generate the creation of thesesupports and resistances are areas where
the price has not wanted to trade and are therefore identified as rejection. That rejection we
already know isvisualized within the volume profile as an LVN. In addition, sometimes the natural
ends of the structures (Creek andIce) will coincide with the ends of the value area (VAH and VAL).
Bypulling a profile of that structure we will be able to observe how all priceaction contained
within the range will be part of the value area.
[FIG 114]
As can be seen in the chart below, the stop of the bullish movementdoes not show very clear price
action where the stop events are genuinelyvisualized. If we are in the final part of the development
of such astructure we could pull a profile of the whole structure to identify keylevels by Volume
Profile. In this case we see how after the final shockfrom above the price quickly crosses the
entire value zone including theVPOC and VWAP. At this point we should be favoring the
distributionand therefore the first scenario in short would be to wait for the test afterbreakout
(LPSY) on any of the operating levels. The first of these levelsto take into account would be the
Value Area Low as it is the first that themarket would find. We see how it made this test to
continue the bearishdevelopment from there. The next and last level to look for the potentialLPSY
would be the VPOC of the profile. In this other example something similar happens. Stopping
eventsmay not be the most visual and then there is the added difficulty offraming that bullish
movement that leaves the value zone and then re-enters. The objective is that, if we find ourselves
seeing an imbalanceafter the development of a structure already with a certain maturity, wecan
launch a profile to identify the operating levels on which to expect theprice to develop the test
looking for the continuation of the movement.Again we see how after the breakout movement, the test
is done justabove the end of the value area of the profile, in this case above the ValueArea High;
it is the perfect area for the search of the long entry trigger.
[FIG 115]
The scope of the profile should include all the price action fromthe time the rotation starts until
just before the imbalance occurs. Thereare traders who may also include the breakout action within
the profile,which is not to say that this is incorrect. Just keep in mind that from thetrading point
of view what we are looking for is that this test afterbreakout is going to look for some trading
level of the previousaccumulation/distribution and this would leave out both the imbalanceand the
subsequent movement to the test. As we can see, most of the structures that develop in real time
markets are not as genuine as shown in the ideal book examples, plus theyare all different from each
other. But this does not mean that they are nottradable. This is where the levels provided by the
Volume Profile toolcome into play. 5.7.2 DETERMINING MARKET BIAS BY ANALYZING THE TRADING ZONES We
will always favor trading in the direction of the last hightrading node generated. And a scenario
against this direction would onlyarise when the price has broken the zone that supported the last
move. If the price is above a high volume node (HVN) we will determinethat the control is in the
hands of the buyers and we will only raise a shortscenario when the price crosses this zone from
below, which will suggestthat the control has changed in favor of the sellers. The logic is that at
these nodes the price returns to a state ofequilibrium and we will not be able to determine in which
direction it willmove subsequently. Only after confirming the effective breakout of thiszone would
we be in a position to propose a scenario with somerobustness.
[FIG 116]
The above chart shows this concept very clearly. If we are in thefinal part of the bullish movement,
above the last HVN, we should waitfor a breakout before looking for a short trade. The profile has
been drawncovering only the bullish movement (from 1 to 2), since what we areinterested in knowing
is where is the volume node that is supporting thismovement. When this is crossed downwards we can
suggest that thecontrol has shifted to be in favor of the bearish and now we are in aposition to
propose a short scenario for example to the test of this HVN.
[FIG 117]
In this other example we have the same dynamics but in reverse.We locate the HVN of the bearish
movement in force and the idea is to continue favoring shorts until it is broken. Note, not until
this HVN isbroken, but the last one to be generated. That is, if the trend continuesdownward, we
must continue to update the profile to identify where thelast HVN is and only at the time of its
break to the upside could long entrybe considered. It should be noted that not necessarily the HVN
that determines thecontrol of the movement must also be the VPOC of the profile. We willsimply take
into account the last one to develop, regardless of whether itis the VPOC or not. As a general rule,
the most advisable is to trade with as manyoperating levels in favor as possible. That is to say, if
I am considering along trading idea, I will want to have all the trading levels below the priceand
vice versa if I am considering a short idea. This context will suggestthat the market is unbalanced
in that direction and that it is therefore thepath of least resistance. If in addition to this we
have the possibility to evaluate therelationship between VPOC, VWAP and price, it will be one
morefootprint that will add strength to the analysis. A relatively close VWAP and VPOC is a
footprint that confirms theoverall balance of the market. Possibly, price is in an extremely
tightrange and the only trading approach here would be to look for reversal atthe extremes.
[FIG 118]
That is exactly what is happening on this day. The dark dotted lineis the VPOC of the developing
session and the orange dynamic linecorresponds to the VWAP. Until a final imbalance to the downside
occursboth levels remain relatively close and this generates constant fluctuationsbetween them,
causing a range day. To determine an imbalance in favor of buyers we want to see theprice above both
the VWAP and the VPOC; while for control in favor ofsellers we want to see the price below both
levels.
[FIG 119]
In this chart we see an example of clear bearish control where at all times of the session the price
is below both the VWAP and the VPOC,acting as resistance to originate new bearish movements. The
temporality to use in these operative levels, as everything, willdepend on the trader. For an
intraday trader the most advisable will be touse the levels of the previous session and of the
current session. Longerterm traders may find it more useful to use such levels on a weekly
basis(weekly VPOC and weekly VWAP). Particularly being a structure trader,I find it useful to take
into account the weekly VWAP in conjunction withthe VPOC of the structure, thus eliminating the
seasonality. It is a matterof taste and this configuration should be adapted to the trading style
ofeach trader.
[FIG 120]
In this chart where we are analyzing a structure we could pull aprofile of it and add the weekly
VWAP (green dynamic line). It is a verygood example to highlight the importance of the context above
any otherelement. If we see a potential Spring that manages to position itself abovethe VWAP we
would be ready to look for a long entry. But if we lookclosely, the VPOC of the profile we would
still be against the VWAP that is marked. We are suggesting the possibility of trading in favor of
themore operating levels the better, what do we do then? Context shouldprevail in cases like this.
We know that VPOC is a very importantbalancing level, but we also know that the market will initiate
animbalance sooner or later; and that shakeout from below suggests to us thepotential initiation of
such an imbalance from the upside. In such acontext we should assign greater relevance to the
development of thestructure above the VPOC. We would have reasoned very differently if the price
after thepotential Spring had not even had the ability to move above the VWAP.That lack of strength
would have suggested to us some bearish control andeven an entry in the opposite direction could
have been priced in seeingSpring's labeled move as a genuine bearish breakout event. Any actionmust
be confirmed or rejected with subsequent price action. That is just what we have in this example. In
a potential Springsituation the price attempts to re-enter the range but is unable to positionabove
the extreme of the structure, the profile VAL and the weeklyVWAP. This is a sign of significant
weakness that would lead us to treatsuch a pattern as distributive.
[FIG 121]
When working with different levels it is also important to keep inmind that we can use several
timeframes in conjunction, for example, twoVWAPs in weekly and monthly timeframes. This
configuration is reallyinteresting if we decide to analyze a longer term context. 5.7.3 ANALYZING
TREND HEALTH A very interesting footprint provided by the Volume Profile is thecontinuous analysis
of the profile of the sessions. When we are observinga bullish movement, a symptom of the health of
the movement would beto observe that the value areas (and therefore the VPOCs) of the sessionsare
generated higher and higher. This suggests that the value of the assetis being accepted in the new
trading areas, it is reaching and therefore thetrend is likely to continue. In this context of
control by buyers, we shouldbe looking for a pullback to trading zones predisposed to go long. The
same applies to downtrends. An unmistakable sign of its healthwould be to see that the value areas
that leave the sessions are observedeach time at lower levels, denoting acceptance of the price. In
thisscenario of bearish control, the most advisable thing to do is to identifyareas of potential
resistance to look for short positions. Something that would alert us to the health of this movement
wouldbe to observe overlapping between several areas of value as well as to seethat some of them are
moving against the direction of the trend, losing thedynamics it had been carrying. We would already
be observing aconsolidation of the price and it could alert us of a change of character. By Wyckoff
methodology we could surely already identify a lateralizationprocess and it would be interesting to
start analyzing the traces of thisstructure in order to try to determine in which direction the
nextimbalance will occur. This potential change in the perception of value is very clearlyvisualized
with the P and b patterns. If the market is in the middle of abearish trend leaving the value zones
lower and lower and then suddenly abP pattern appears, this could be the end of the bearish movement
or atleast a temporary halt. The fact that the market has developed this Ppattern after the b
pattern suggests a change in the perception of value. Atleast temporarily it no longer wants to
trade at lower prices and we couldeven be facing the beginning of an uptrend.
[FIG 122]
Rather than seeking to clearly observe the ideal pattern, what isinteresting is the evolution of the
value generation, i.e. the rotation of theValue Areas. In this example the participants have had
enough capacity togenerate value above the previous one and this alone should alert us to thehealth
of the bearish movement and even put us on alert for a possibleaccumulation. The same would be true
in reverse. If we are looking for a bearish market turn, a signal that would add strength to such
analysis would be toobserve a Pb pattern.
[FIG 123]
This example is a bit more complex and interesting to analyze. Thefirst thing that is striking is
that the pattern does not occur in tandem, butrather two sessions in between. On the other hand, we
can see how profileb does not generate value below the Value Area of the profile P. This is a real
example; the market behaves erratically most of thetime so looking for the appearance of perfect
patterns can be a waste oftime. It would seem more interesting to stay with the dynamics withinthem;
what they implicitly suggest to us. After the appearance of the P-type profile there is a change
incharacter and the market begins a rotation process. The following twodays the value areas are
overlapped, showing the acceptance of these pricelevels by the vast majority of participants.
Finally, the creation of the typeb profile triggers the bearish imbalance. At that precise moment
when theprice is below the value area of profile b and after seeing all that has beenanalyzed
previously, a short scenario could be proposed, seeking theeffect of this potential distributive
structure. If we look closely at b, the imbalance does not occur at thebeginning of the session as
theory suggests, but rather in the last part ofthe session. The key is that this imbalance is
rejected and re-enters thevalue area. In essence this is the implication behind the pattern: it
makesno difference when the imbalance occurs as long as the price generates arejection and re-enters
the value area. For trading purposes what would beless interesting for us would be to observe the
imbalance at the end of thesession and whose close is established outside the value area. Although
the ideal in potential distributive schemes would be toobserve first the rejection to continue
rising plus the generation of valuebelow the previous sessions, the appearance of this protocol in
reverse(first the generation of value below and then the rejection to trade athigher prices)
implicitly suggests the same reading of change in theperception of value. In the end, all cumulative
and distributive schemes implicitly carrythis change in the perception of value; and to a greater or
lesser extentthese P and b turn patterns will always be visualized. ❖ A bearish turn with pattern Pb
is nothing more than a distribution that will have a greater or lesser duration which hasbeen
confirmed with the generation of value in b and it is possiblethat lower prices will follow. ❖ A
bullish turn with bP pattern tacitly is an accumulation whose change in the perception of value
possibly gives rise to higherprices. 5.7.4 VPOC MIGRATION The current level of the VPOC represents
agreement by both partieson the value of the asset, but What reading to do in the event of a VPOC
migration? This issue has brought many traders upside down as the reading itoffers has two different
points of view. On the one hand many advocatethat this is an unequivocal sign of the health of the
movement andtherefore suggests continuity in the direction of the trend. Many othersadvocate the
position that a turn in the market is possibly originating. The only objective is that it represents
a value zone where price hasbeen accepted due to the high trading it has generated. The
questionwould be to determine the meaning of this value migration, whether as acontinuation or as a
reversal. Under the principle that every market action must be confirmed orrejected by its
subsequent reaction, the key lies in evaluating thesubsequent price action following the checkpoint
migration. As a generalrule, if we do not see a continuation in the direction of the precedingmove
without consuming too much time we should question the health ofthat move. Since we cannot know in
advance whether a VPOC migration will make continuation or reversal sense, it is most useful to be
prepared forboth scenarios. To this end, we will develop two simple protocols in orderto establish
some general guidelines. This section is focused on intraday trading, although the underlyingidea is
equally valid for application to any other time frame. 1. VPOC migration. If the preceding trend
movement is healthy,after the migration of the VPOC we want to see a new momentumdevelop without
consuming too much time. 2. Non-continuity. If after the VPOC migration the price does nothave the
ability to continue to move in the direction of the precedingtrend we would be in a position to at
least begin to question thecontinuity of the move. 3. Time consumption. This is a fundamental
footprint. The generalrule of thumb is that the longer the price goes without continuing infavor of
the preceding trend movement after the VPOC migration, themore likely a market turn rather than a
continuation is likely to occur.Ifwe want to look for the turn we will mainly observe that it starts
tosideways consume a relatively large amount of time relative to what itwas doing previously during
continuations. 4. The change of character. If migration occurs, an excessivelateralization without
the ability to continue in the direction it had andin addition now appears an impulsive movement in
the opposite direction we will be in disposition to raise an operative idea inreversion. 5.
Operative idea. The first operative level that we will take intoaccount to wait for the price and
look for the entry trigger will be theend of the broken value zone. If it breaks below, we will wait
at theVAL and if it breaks above, at the VAH. As a second level, the VPOC.
[FIG 124]
In this example (Intraday reversal trade with pattern b) we havepulled a manual profile to see how
the volume was distributed at thatparticular moment. We see that after starting the session the
price falls andmigrates the VPOC (1), then begins to rotate on it showing the non-continuity (2) and
time consumption (3). Then comes the change ofcharacter with the upward imbalance (4) to finally go
to test the old VPOC zone (5), where we could be looking for the long entry. We have to keep in mind
that if we are trading with the profile of acurrent session it will continue to develop as the day
progresses so thatafter the breakout, we may identify the level of the Value Area where wewill wait
for the price and then change its location. Although it is true thatit would not be the ideal
context, the same trading area could bemaintained since from a logical point of view this is still a
node of lowvolume and therefore an interesting area of potential rejection of the price.In addition,
what the price is going to test is the previousaccumulation/distribution zone, so leaving the
profile of the range istotally advisable.
[FIG 125]
In this example we see what would be a VPOC migration with areversal direction (we know this after
seeing the subsequent movement) but which does not follow the proposed protocol. When they do it
withthis urgency, with little preparation, it is practically impossible to operate.This is the
problem with these V-turns. The incorporation of this example is intended to point out that notall
migrations with reversal direction will follow the proposed protocol,far from it. With this series
of steps what we are trying to do is toobjectify the turn and that it is based on the Law of Cause
and Effect,since again this protocol does not cease to be cumulative/distributiveprocesses. In
addition, it is a very interesting graph to deal with the concept ofacceptance and rejection. By
definition, a VPOC migration suggests newacceptance at those price levels. The objective fact at
that precise momentis that more contracts have been traded (more acceptance) and thereforethe
migration has occurred. But what reading would it leave if it generatesa total reversal of the
movement? Well, again, objectively, what we see isthat if the session finally closes away from those
levels, such actionremains as a rejection even if that migration has occurred. The importance of the
principle that every price action must beconfirmed or rejected by the subsequent action appears
again. In this casethe first action has been the migration of the VPOC, but that change invalue has
been rejected by the subsequent reaction, which has reversed theentire movement. If we recall, a
change in the perception of value occurs when thevariables Price, Time and Volume work in
consonance. In this case wehave the Price discovery movement, the Volume generation but the
Timeconsumption that would confirm the Value fails. PROTOCOL TO FAVOR THE CONTINUATION: For intraday
continuation trading the action protocol is muchsimpler: 1. VPOC Migration. Generally when the
market intends tocontinue in the direction of the preceding movement, after themigration of the VPOC
the price will start the new momentum withsome speed. The urgency to continue moving in that
direction willcause relatively little time to be consumed before continuing in thatdirection. 2.
Trigger search. We are therefore ready to enter the market. It issimply a matter of waiting for our
setup to appear before entering.
[FIG 126]
In the example we see that on the third VPOC migration the priceinstead of continuing upward
reverses downward leaving that price actionon the left as distributive. Thereafter the subsequent
migrations makecontinuation sense as they are followed by bearish impulses with relativealacrity.
Although this type of trade has been presented on an intraday basis,during the course of a session;
it may appear on the chart at differenttimes and the underlying idea will remain the same. It may
develop overthe course of a single session, form over more than one session, or evendevelop as a
longer-term structure. Regardless of its duration, theunderlying logic is exactly the same. 5.7.5
CALIBRATION OF POSITION MANAGEMENT The levels to use will depend on the type of profile used based
onyour trading style, but generally speaking the logic will be exactly thesame for all of them: ❖
Entry. Regardless of whether we are in a trend or range context, the identification of the operating
levels, mainly theVWAP, VPOC and high and low zones of the value area (VAHand VAL) will be extremely
useful for us to wait on them thedevelopment of our market entry trigger. ❖ Stop Loss. For the
establishment of the stop loss we want to identify areas where there has been a previous rejection;
andthese are the areas of low trading or Low Volume Nodes. Theprice generated a turn on them and we
expect that in the futurethey will behave in the same way; therefore it is an excellent areato place
our stop protection. In addition to the LVN, the moreoperating levels we have in favor, the better.
❖ Take Profit. For the establishment of take profits we are going to look for zones of high previous
negotiation. As we havealready mentioned, high volume nodes (HVN) produce certainmagnetism in the
price and therefore are excellent areas for thelocation of targets.


---- SECTION bk2-c30 ----
RAW_LABEL: 5.8 TRADING PRINCIPLES WITH VALUE AREAS
5.8 TRADING PRINCIPLES WITH VALUE AREAS Regardless of the type of trader you decide to be and
therefore thetemporality and structures to use, these principles are universal withrespect to the
value areas of a given profile, be it that of a candlestick,session, movement or structure. 5.8.1
TRADING RANGE PRINCIPLE
[FIG 127]
If the price is within a value area, as long as the market conditiondoes not change the market is
likely to continue to generate value aroundthe center point so the price will most likely be
rejected when theextremes are reached. Buy low and sell high. In the following chart we see a real
example of the principle ofrange trading. It can be any asset or timeframe; what we do have to
takeinto account is a reference profile to work on. For an intraday approach itis recommended to
work on the profile of the previous session. Forlonger-term approaches, weekly profiles or
Composite-type profiles thatinclude more price action may be useful.
[FIG 128]
What is interesting in this case is that the price is within theprevious day's value area,
suggesting a balance in the market. With thisbasic idea, and as long as the sentiment of the
participants does notchange, any operative idea should be to wait for the reversal at theextremes of
its value area, as seen in the chart. The minimum target for this reversal at extremes is a test to
thecontrol zone (VPOC), with the most ambitious target being a move thatcompletely traverses the
value area and reaches the opposite extreme. As always, the trades that will give us the most
confidence will bethose whose trigger is located in confluence on more than one operatinglevel. In
the example of the reversal that occurs on the VAL we see thatthe price also tests the weekly VWAP
(green line) and a former controlzone (DevelopingVPOC). 5.8.2 REVERSION PRINCIPLE
[FIG 129]
[FIG 130]
If price attempts to enter a value area and succeeds, it will mostlikely go to visit the opposite
end of that value area. The market hasrefused to trade at those price levels so it returns to the
previous valuearea. Adaptation of Market Profile's 80% rule.
[FIG 131]
This chart shows the opening of the last session away from theprevious day's value area at the top,
indicating an imbalance to the bullishside and therefore initially suggesting a buying control. This
control mustbe confirmed by the acceptance of the imbalance and we see how at themoment of truth, in
a position of potential bullish continuation above theValue Area High, the price fails, re-entering
again to the previous valuearea. This is a very instructive example to visualize the importance
ofkeeping in mind both buy and sell scenarios in order to be prepared andreact in time when the
market tells us to do so. Initially in this case wewould be looking for such a bullish continuation
above the upper end ofthe value area; but seeing its inability and subsequent re-entry, the
readingnow is that the bullish price discovery has not been accepted and thereforethe probability
now is that the price will visit the opposite end of the valuearea. After the initial re-entry, an
inside test occurs above the VAH at theconfluence with the weekly VWAP (green line) to initiate from
there thebearish movement that runs through the entire value area. At this point theprice returns to
a condition of total balance evidenced by this continuous bounce between the extremes of the Value
Area. 5.8.3 CONTINUATION PRINCIPLE
[FIG 132]
[FIG 133]
If the price tries to enter a value area and fails to do so by beingrejected at the VA end or
elsewhere, it will most likely initiate animbalance in favor of that direction. This is the test
trade after a breakout. Price leaves a value zone andgenerates acceptance. This acceptance puts the
direction in favor of theprevious breakout as the most probable direction. It should be noted that
the price can come from outside that valuearea or from inside. The operating logic would be exactly
the same. In the following example we see on a real chart the development ofthis operating principle
of continuation in its variant in which the pricecomes from outside the working profile.
[FIG 134]
The opening occurs above the Value Area High of the profile, sothe first interpretation we must make
is that there has been an imbalanceto the bullish side in which buyers have had enough capacity to
move theprice away from its last value. With this basic reasoning in which the market seems to
indicate thatthe buyers are in control, the first scenario approach would be to wait for some kind
of test before continuing with the development in favor of theimbalance, in this case to the upside.
The price opens the session and develops some lateralization andthen goes to look for the VAH zone
where it generates the bullish turnthat could offer us a buying opportunity. The most astute Wyckoff
traders will be able to identify even acumulative pattern from the beginning of the session, acting
as a potentialSpring of this structure. This is a very good example to visualize theimportance of
the context: in trading zones of purchase we want to seepotential accumulations, as is the case
here. 5.8.4 FAILED REVERSION PRINCIPLE
[FIG 135]
[FIG 136]
If the price tries to enter a value area and succeeds, but is stronglyrejected at the VPOC of that
range, the reversal trade would be cancelleduntil further price action is seen. If it manages to
recover the end of the value area, the continuationtrade would be activated; while if it finally
breaks the VPOC effectively,the reversal scenario would continue to be active with the objective
oftesting the opposite end of the value area.
[FIG 137]
The session opens below the previous value area so the first reasoning would be that the market is
in imbalance and potential bearishcontrol that would need to be confirmed. At the first zone above
which to wait for such confirmation of sellercontrol (Value Area Low), the price overrides the
scenario and re-entersthe value area, triggering the reversal trade. As we will see below, anytrade
should be managed upon reaching the first relevant trading level;and in this case, a potential
purchase on the VAL should necessarily bemanaged on the VPOC of the previous session. After reaching
this level, sellers appear, unbalancing the marketagain and provoking the development of a strong
bearish movement. Thisaggressive reaction pushes the price out of the value area again, changingthe
market sentiment again and triggering at that point the failed reversalplus bearish continuation
trade variant. Now it does develop a successful test above the Value Area Low toinitiate from there
the bearish movement with possible targets at theweekly VWAP and at a nakedVPOC below. 5.8.5 SUMMARY
TABLE OF THE OPERATING PRINCIPLE WITH VALUE AREAS
[FIG 138]
[FIG 139]

