==== PART bk2-p6 ====
RAW_LABEL: PART 6. ORDER FLOW


---- SECTION bk2-c31 ----
RAW_LABEL: 6.1 FOOTPRINT READING
6.1 FOOTPRINT READING
[FIG 140]
The first thing to be clear about is that the reading of the order flow isdone diagonally and not
horizontally. This is due to the very nature of themarket in which participants can trade in
different ways. Buyers can participate either passively by leaving their demands onthe BID or
actively by attacking the ASK. Sellers can enter either byplacing their bids at the ASK or by
assaulting the BID with orders to market. Participants therefore have two prices at which to trade:
the BIDand the ASK. There is no single price at which all participants can trade atthe same time. If
there were, it would make more sense to analyze thefootprint horizontally rather than diagonally.
That is why to assess the existing strength or weakness amongmarket participants at a given price
level we will always compare ordersexecuted diagonally upwards: one level of the BID with respect to
ahigher level in the ASK column.


---- SECTION bk2-c32 ----
RAW_LABEL: 6.2 IMBALANCES
6.2 IMBALANCES A large part of the key actions that we try to identify in order flowanalysis have to
do with unbalances. This behavior is composed of hightrading (high number of contracts traded) in
one of the columns and at thesame time low trading in the opposite column (diagonally). It should be
noted that this unbalance should meet certain minimumparameters to be determined as such. The fact
that there is simply a highervolume than in the opposite column is not enough, there needs to be
adisproportionate difference in volume. And this difference can beparameterized by configuring the
platform to show such unbalances whenthere is a 200%, 300% or 400% disparity between the levels to
becompared. This means that 2, 3 or 4 times more volume has been tradedon a column than on the
opposite column. Many traders also add a minimum number of contracts to calibratethe imbalance. If
you have a deep knowledge of the market you areworking in this filter will help you to refine the
identification of suchimbalances even further. Using these rotations in percentages allows the
analysis to betteradapt to market conditions and adds some confidence as they are objective values.
[FIG 141]
In this example chart we see imbalances in favor of the BID with adifference of 400%; in other
words, 4 times more contracts have beentraded in the BID than in the ASK in relation to the diagonal
oppositelevel. The analysis to detect possible imbalances is carried out bypropinquity nature in
comparative terms for two reasons: 1. Because it takes into account the level of the opposite
columnto determine that there really is an imbalance. 2. Because it will depend on the volume traded
on that particularcandle. Had such an action occurred at another time (wheregenerally higher volume
was traded) it might not have beenseen as such an imbalance.


---- SECTION bk2-c33 ----
RAW_LABEL: 6.3 TURNING PATTERN
6.3 TURNING PATTERN Order flow analysis involves many concepts. In an attempt to simplify andtry to
objectify its reading, and since we are only going to proceed to itsanalysis in potential trading
situations, we will be looking for the eventsthat suggest an effective market turn: potential
takeover and initiative. This is a blockade through limit orders. There are large traders whodo not
want the price to move further in that direction and initially enterthrough passive orders to cause
the movement to stop. What is interesting is to see that after this high trading the price haslittle
or no movement in that direction. Sometimes these processes willtake longer and large traders will
be forced to take such action repeatedlyover a price range, visualizing possible takeover over more
than onefootprint.
[FIG 142]
When determining a potential absorption we initially want to see itappear on relatively high volume.
This will minimize the possibility thatwe are at the wrong time in the market where no such action
is actuallytaking place. On the other hand, although the color of the candlestick isindifferent, its
closing price must be against the imbalance. To treat suchbehavior as potential takeover buying we
want to see the imbalancesremain above the closing price; and below the closing price for theexample
of potential takeover selling. This is the greatest demonstrationof blocking and refusal to move
further in that direction. As with any other market action, it is confirmed or rejected by
thesubsequent reaction. If we observe high volume, a potential takeover andthe inability of the
price to continue moving in that direction, the oddsincrease that we are actually looking at a
takeover. Although such takeovers may appear leaving wicks, this is not a necessary characteristic
as they can also appear on candlesticks that closeat the same end. The key here is to see that the
price does notsubsequently continue in that direction. As we have already mentioned, the execution
of passive ordersalone does not have the ability to move the price, aggressiveness isneeded. If the
analysis is correct and we are in the right place, after seeing apossible takeover, the appearance
now of initiative will be the definitivesignal to confirm the market turn we were looking for.
[FIG 143]
This initiative is represented as large trades executed with marketorders on the column in which we
are looking to enter the market: If wewant to buy we will look to see aggression in the ASK column
and if wewant to sell we will look for aggression in the BID. Again we quote the principle that
every action must be confirmedor rejected by the subsequent market reaction. If we see a
possibleinitiative which is followed by a subsequent and immediate price move inthat direction, we
will be in a position to confirm that action. This initiative, this large volume executed will be
very easy toidentify on the trace as the imbalance with respect to the rest of the levelsof that
same period will be very evident. Some authors use this term torefer to several imbalances together.
While it is true that the moreimbalances we observe, the stronger the approach will be,
theconfiguration of the imbalance greatly influences its representation sinceit is not the same to
configure the software to show imbalances of 400%than 150% where the latter will appear much more
frequently. As with the takeover, we must take into account the volume tradedon that candlestick. In
order to add confidence to the reading, we want tosee that the volume is relatively high. Unlike the
takeover, in case of the potential initiative we want tosee that the closing price is in favor of
the imbalance; that is, in case of abuy initiative we want to see the imbalances in the lower part
of thecandle; and in the upper part in case of a sell initiative. This trace suggeststo us that
there is harmony between that action and the subsequent andimmediate price movement. In essence this
candlestick that denotes initiative is the same as theSOS/SOWbar that we work under Wyckoff
methodology, and shouldtherefore comply with their common characteristics:: ❖ Relatively high
volume. ❖ Wide range. ❖ Close at the extreme. Sometimes such a market turn pattern may be observed
in one ortwo candlesticks (V-turn). At other times, after visualizing a possibletakeover, the market
will need more time consumption before theinitiative appears. In the event that the market needs to
consume that timebefore the actual turn occurs, what we want to see to add strength to thetakeover
idea is some sideways movement of the price where we can seethe inability of the market to continue
in the direction it was going, this isa very evident sign of the takeover action at times. Another
interesting detail that would add strength to the reversalpattern is if the market leaves a finished
auction at the end. This wouldsignal to us the refusal of traders to continue trading in that
direction andsuch lack of interest would facilitate the turn in the opposite direction. Ifwe are not
able to identify the finished auction through footprint analysis,we can use the Volume Profile as we
have already seen. 6.3.1 BEARISH TURN PATTER: BUYING ABSORPTION AND INITIATIVE SELLING If we are
currently waiting for a bearish trigger to develop, we willlook to the left of the chart in order to
identify any traces that suggestpossible aggressive takeovers. As we have already seen with order
crossing, aggressive buyingcrosses with limit selling and this interaction appears in the ASK
column. Therefore, what we want to see as a sign of possible takeovers are largetrades in the ASK
column on or near the trading area. But not just any location of these large trades would not be
enough,the ideal would be to see them on the top of the candlesticks because incase that really big
traders want to enter with limited sales, these will be ata high price level (buy low and sell
high). This possible takeover alone is not enough to enter the market. Weneed to see aggressiveness
that suggests selling intent, and we identifythis with the appearance of large trades in the BID
column. This BID traceis objectively the execution of aggressive Sell Market orders and giventhe
context in which we find ourselves, we could interpret that the originand intentionality of such
orders is to enter the market directionally byadding selling pressure. The ideal location where we
want these large trades to show up isover the top of the footprint. If in addition to this we see a
subsequentdownward price movement, we would be facing another footprint thatwould suggest the
aggressive entry of sellers, visually and bymethodology it would appear on the chart as a Sign of
Weakness bar(SOWbar).
[FIG 144]
In this example we see how this pattern of potential takeover ofpurchases plus sellers initiative
appears during the development of twocontiguous candlesticks. It would be the exact theoretical
representationof what we are looking for: an approach to the trading zone with a movethat denotes
lack of interest, a quasi weather action where ASKimbalances occur on the high side of the
candlestick, followed by acandlestick with BID imbalance also on its high side that achieves
somedownward displacement and closes at candlestick lows (SOWbar). Wealso see a significant rotation
in the Delta from +197 to -171, suggesting achange of control in favor of sellers, confirmed by the
subsequent bearishreaction. 6.3.2 BULLISH TURN PATTERN: SELLING ABSORPTION AND INITIATIVE BUYING In
a context of waiting for the development of the bullish trigger,we will be looking for traces that
suggest a takeover of sales. Converselyto the above, this takeover should show up as strong activity
in the BIDcolumn. Takeover is a simple blockade where in this case the price is notallowed to fall.
All sell orders assaulting the BID are matched with buylimit orders making it impossible to move the
price down. This is a veryimportant footprint of professional accumulation. With respect to the
location of these large trades we want to seethem at the bottom of the footprint as a true
reflection of the blockade. Ifwe see those huge volumes at the top it would make little sense to
think about possible takeover selling. Subsequently what we want to see is buying initiative:
aggressionto the ASK suggesting the intention to enter the market directionallydriving the price up.
We want to see these imbalances remain below theclosing price of the candlestick, which will suggest
that this aggressionhas had some continuity to the upside. In essence a SOSbar is exactly that,
aggression by large traders whoget a large price move. The difference is that through candlestick
analysiswe see the final representation and not the order crossover that occurswithin it.
[FIG 145]
Here is a genuine theoretical chart of a bullish reversal. If we lookat it, before the turn we can
already see a potential takeover on thecandlestick that marks a -536 Delta. It is a very good
example to highlightthe importance of the Delta. After that -536 is followed by a
bullishcandlestick, this is a first indication that we are possibly facing a takeover because if the
executed there were really aggressive sales, the price wouldhave continued to fall. Instead, the
price reacts by rising; but this bullishcandlestick does not have much commitment behind it since on
the onehand it does not leave any imbalance to support its movement, and on theother hand the delta
is not very significant in relation to what we haveseen previously. Most likely the market is not
yet ready to go up. And that is when it develops the effective turn in a two candlestickpattern. New
takeovers can be seen in that great first bearish candle whichis accompanied by a delta of -312 to
later appear a bullish initiative candlewith imbalances in the ASK, a relatively high volume and a
delta of +607evidencing now a clear rotation in favor of buyers.


---- SECTION bk2-c34 ----
RAW_LABEL: 6.4 CONTINUATION PATTERN
6.4 CONTINUATION PATTERN The continuation patterns serve us mainly to confirm the
directionalityoriginated in the previous turn in addition to allowing us to identify pointswhere to
look for incorporation when a trend movement is underway. This pattern is composed of two actions:
the creation of the controland its subsequent test.. This pattern is the clearest signal of interest
in favor of a direction.It is visualized on the track by imbalances. It is essentially the same
asinitiative with the only difference being that it occurs once the movementhas been initiated.
Although we could determine a control with a single imbalance, itis advisable to wait for the
appearance of at least two imbalances. Thelogic is that the more imbalances the traders are able to
generate, thestronger the zone will be. Again, it must be taken into account thatdepending on how
demanding it is to parameterize the software, it will show more or less imbalances. For this reason,
it is not necessary toconfine oneself to theoretical definitions that are not totally objective.
Thefact that a single imbalance occurs instead of two or three together doesnot mean that this event
cannot be treated as a control. This is because the control action is not only about
imbalances;other characteristics such as candlestick range, candlestick closing leveland volume
traded must be met. We therefore identify a bullish control when we see imbalances inthe ASK column
on a candle with good volume that manages to close inthe upper third of the total range. Preferably
the further down thecandlestick range the imbalances are, the stronger the stock. Similarly, we
identify a bearish control on imbalances (the higherthe range of the candlestick, the better) in the
BID column on a bearishcandlestick with high volume that closes in the lower third of its range. If
we have not had the possibility to enter the turning pattern afterseeing the takeover plus
initiative, the creation of the controls will offer usa new possibility to join as long as there is
still a considerable distancefrom the level where we will set the target. The participants
generating the pattern have had the ability toexceed in an exaggerated way the number of contracts
traded aggressivelywith respect to the traders in the opposite column. This action is veryrelevant
as this is not just a single, isolated imbalance, but they haveenough momentum to create three
imbalances in a row at different pricelevels. If after seeing a reversal pattern we observe such an
occurrence onthe print it will give us greater confidence that we are positioned in favor of the
majority of the professional money. This is a move that is going to test a previous area where
aggressivetraders (controls) have potentially entered. Controls naturally identify a strong zone
where it is assumed thatthe traders who caused the previous imbalance will reappear again shouldthe
market revisit the zone. That is the underlying logic behind that particular action. We aregoing to
favor the fact that those traders are going to defend their positionby not letting the price move
against them, thus offering us a goodopportunity. So what we will be looking for is the development
of a newreversal pattern over the zone. A zone that will encompass the price levelsidentified in the
control. In this context, the takeover action may not be soremarkable since the big effort has
already been made previously. Whatshould be evident is a new show of initiative suggesting the
aggressiveentry of such traders defending their position. This should be thedefinitive signal to
enter the market. Sometimes such a test will develop very quickly on the nextdeveloping candle. This
will probably be seen as a wick that denotes alack of interest to trade in that area leaving a full
reversal of thecandlestick afterwards. At other times there will be a small extension inthat zone
where the price will temporarily appear to break it but eventually reverses leaving a rejection. And
there will be the occasionaltime when the test leaves it practically ticking. The key here is to
keep anopen mind and be flexible with respect to the representation of such a test. A It should be
noted that the lack of interest should be manifest in thisbehavior as in any other known test action
under price and volume analysis.Clear evidence of this inactivity as we already know would be
observablethrough relatively low volume.
[FIG 146]
In this example the price comes from generating a bullish turn andis in the middle of the movement.
The bullish control is created in thisbullish candlestick with a wide range, good volume and
positive delta. Weidentify the imbalance level that also coincides with the VPOC of thecandlestick
and we extend it to the right as a potential long search tradingarea. The price then pulls back
above this level and generates a twocandlestick reversal with good delta rotation. It is interesting
to note howthe bearish candlestick reaches this level with a decrease in volumedenoting rejection
and how the bullish candlestick subsequently generatesa large volume leaving a new imbalance in the
ASK. From there the pricecontinues its bullish development.
[FIG 147]
In this other example we see how the bearish control is generatedon a candle with large displacement
and high volume with a largenegative delta suggesting strong aggressive entry of sellers. If we
look, the imbalance in the BID is generated along with otherlevels that have had a high trading so
we can assume that area as a HighVolume Node; and this will be the one that we will project in the
future tolook for the bearish continuation on it. In this case the chart is 15 minutes so if we want
to refine the entrywe could lower the time frame to 5 minutes to look for the bearishreversal
pattern: takeover of purchases and sellers' initiative. In case wewant to continue maintaining the
time frame, we would wait for theclosing of the candle that tests this control to evaluate if
sellers haveentered again and our entry trigger is activated. The key, as discussed above, ahead of
two or more imbalancesbeing generated together to treat such action as the control is that even if
itis only one, it appears on a candle with a wide range, close near theextreme and relatively high
volume as these are the traces that suggest tous the entry of large traders. For the continuation
pattern, we could also treat as the control onwhich to look for the test that initial imbalance that
we identified in theinitiation of the reversal pattern. Most likely it meets all the
characteristicswe are looking for so it would be the first area to project in which to lookfor the
entry.


---- SECTION bk2-c35 ----
RAW_LABEL: 6.5 FRACTALITY
6.5 FRACTALITY Although basically the reading of this type of pattern is intraday oriented,this
logic can be extrapolated in the same way to higher time frames. In the turning pattern observable
in the Order Flow fingerprint,takeover and initiative is nothing more than a minuscule-
scalerepresentation of what in another temporality would be a cumulative ordistributive scheme. The
same turning pattern could be observed in aslightly larger perspective (during the development of
one or severalsessions) and would be visualized in the form of P and b, where the bell isnothing
more than a takeover process within it, with the initiative beingsubsequently represented as the
movement of the breakout of the valuezone. Assuming it on an even larger scale we would have the
mediumand long term structures composed from several days to weeks. Thesestructures again represent
exactly the same behavior, where the takeoverprocess would be the accumulation/distribution range,
and the initiativewould be the trend movement albeit on a larger scale. The only difference is the
time consumption needed by the marketto complete such a takeover process. In the following example
we see how in the chart on the left it develops in a three candlestick pattern; inthe central one it
does it during the development of a session; and in thechart on the right it needs to consume
several days to carry out the processleaving a clearer structure.
[FIG 148]
The same is true of continuation patterns. In essence a control willbe part of an impulsive move
while a test to that control will be part of acorrective move. This is the natural dynamic of trend
movements:impulses and reversals. Looking at it on a higher scale, such a control can be identified
inthe VPOC if we launch a profile over the entire impulsive leg. This VPOCwould represent the
control zone of the whole movement. That is whythese are levels to be taken into account on which to
look for the end of apossible retracement and the beginning of a new impulse. And on a longer term
scale, where we try to analyze the overallcontext, we assign the control function on the high volume
nodes (HVN),which represent accumulation/distribution structures over other timeframes. In the
following chart we see an example of this concept offractality with controls. We launch a profile of
the last impulse andidentify the VPOC of that leg. This VPOC can be considered as the sellerscontrol
zone so a good strategy would be to try to go short in a future testof the zone. The key to
understanding the concept is to be clear that if this bearish momentum was part of a single
candlestick, the most traded levelwithin it would be that VPOC. We also see how this control is
generatedby a minor redistribution scheme which causes the creation of the HighVolume Node.
[FIG 149]
This is the best explanation to understand the fractality of themarket. As we can see, the behaviors
are always the same regardless ofthe time variable. Here lies one of the advantages of this
methodology.Once this is internalized, we can be in a position to cover with a greatersolidity the
trade in different timeframes.

