==== PART bk2-p1 ====
RAW_LABEL: PART 1. ADVANCED CONCEPTS OF THE WYCKOFF METHODOLOGY


---- SECTION bk2-c1 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.1 THE LABELS
1.1 THE LABELS All the theoretical section seen in the first book is necessary andindispensable
content to master this approach and truly understand howthe market moves, but the Wyckoff
methodology, or my way ofunderstanding it, goes much further. It is not simply a matter of labeling
a chart almost robotically andthat's it. We have learned what underlies each event; how it is
formed,how it is represented on the chart, the psychology behind it and so on. Butas I say, the
method is much richer. I say this because, by the very nature of the market, it is
practicallyimpossible for any two structures to be completely the same. While it istrue that on a
daily basis we see "textbook" schemes, which are verygenuinely adapted to classic examples, on most
occasions the market willdevelop less conventional structures, where the identification of
suchevents will be more complex. It is therefore essential not to focus on the exact search for
events(mainly the stop events that make up Phase A) and to keep in mind thatwhat is really important
is the action as a whole. In other words, in manycharts we will see that a trend movement stops and
starts a lateralization process, but we are not able to correctly identify those first 4
stoppingevents. In view of this, we may discard the asset and miss a future tradingopportunity. This
is a mistake. As I say, the important thing is not that weknow how to identify those 4 stop events,
but that the market hasobjectively produced the stop of the trend movement. You may notidentify the
Climax, the Reaction and the Test in a genuine way, but theobjective is that the market has stopped
and has initiated a change ofcharacter (migration from trend to sideways).
[FIG 002]
As we can see in the examples, although these structures do notlook anything like the classic
structures already studied, if we open thegraph and we find ourselves at the point marked with the
arrow, it is notunreasonable to think that possibly a process of accumulation hasdeveloped below. It
will be more or less difficult to identify the events ofthe methodology, but what is objective is
that we see a level where theprice is that we see a level where the price has rejected on
severaloccasions (Creek) and has finally managed to break it and position itselfabove. This is the
key.
[FIG 003]
Surely if we force ourselves we can label each and every movementbut I repeat that this is not the
important thing. The important thing aboutthe methodology is the logic behind it: that for the price
to go up theremust first be an accumulation; and for it to go down there must be adistribution. The
form or manner in which they develop these processesshould not be the determining factor. The level
of open-mindedness required is very great. Maybe evensome people's heads have exploded, but this is
the reality. Fortunately, weoften see classic structures, but the continuous interplay between
supplyand demand means that these processes can develop in infinite ways, andwe have to be prepared
to see them all the same.
[FIG 004]
Rather than thinking about labeling each and every pricemovement, we are going to focus on trying to
identify according to thetraces we observe who is probably gaining market control based on thetheory
studied.


---- SECTION bk2-c2 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.2 PRICE VS. VOLUME
1.2 PRICE VS. VOLUME In our way of conceiving market analysis, we initially do not value
thepossibility of not taking into account either of these two data points, priceand volume. But as
you delve deeper into the ecosystem that surroundsthe financial world, some obstacles start to
arise. Without beating around the bush, I have to say that in my viewprice data is certainly more
relevant than volume data. And I will nowreason this assertion on the basis of two elements. On the
one hand, the intraday volume that we can analyze in anyasset can be very misleading depending on
the time of the session. Forexample, at the opening of the American session of the S&P500 in
itslocal time (ETH), we will always see a large volume, much higher thanthat seen prior to that
opening during the regular time (RTH). And ofcourse, all the previous analysis will be biased in a
certain way.
[FIG 005]
As we can see in the chart of the ES (SP500 future), the highestvolatility and therefore price
movement occurs during the Americansession, with a very clear lack of participation during regular
tradinghours. It would not make much sense to make analysis taking into accountglobally all price
action and volume as it could lead to confusion. It is not that during regular trading hours we have
identified amovement with a lack of interest (low volume); it is that this low volumeis due to an
absence of traders at that time. The same would be true forother times during the session, such as
at the mid-day stop or just beforethe start of the final stretch of the day, when there is also a
significantincrease in volume. Once we know this, we have two ways to deal with this situation: ❖ If
we want to continue trading on intraday time frameswe must necessarily analyze the price and volume
in comparativeterms; on the one hand the one observed during local hours andon the other hand the
one seen during regular hours. ❖ Furthermore, the best way to avoid confusion is toanalyze the daily
chart. As this temporality covers both sessions (ETH and RTH), there is no need to distinguish them
for analysis.But of course, this would already require a total change of tradingstyle. If there is
one piece of data that already incorporates all theinformation, it is the price. The price is the
graphical representation of allthe orders already executed. We could be analyzing an asset at any
timeand the price action would be faithfully reflected without having to beaware of the time of the
session and perform comparative analysis. This isthe advantage of price. Although without volume we
lose a large part of the availableinformation, the continuous interaction between supply and
demandleaves its traces in the price and it develops some certainly repetitivepatterns (not in form
but in substance). Obviously I am not recommending trading without analyzingvolume data, it is not
necessary; I simply wanted to highlight theprevalence of price over volume for our way of
understanding and tradingthe markets. Later on we will also see another drawback of volume data due
tothe Over the Counter (OTC) and Dark Pools markets.


---- SECTION bk2-c3 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.3 TYPES OF ADVANCED CHARTS
1.3 TYPES OF ADVANCED CHARTS In recent times, other forms of representing market activity have
alsoappeared. Among these types of charts are tick, volume and range charts. The main advantage of
these charts is that they reduce the noisepresent in time charts. These three types of charts have
the commonpeculiarity that they eliminate the time variable, which can be very usefulprecisely for
conditions such as those described above, where the marketspans different activity environments.
1.3.1 TICKS CHARTS
[FIG 006]
A tick represents a transaction, a negotiation between two parties.Therefore, the tick chart will be
updated (the current candlestick will beclosed and a new one will be opened) when a certain number
oftransactions (ticks) have taken place. The configuration of the chart (the number of ticks) will
vary frommarket to market as volatility differs from one market to another. This iswhy you will have
to make different tests until you find the most suitableone. Generally the volume will be very
similar in all the candlesticksgenerated, but there will be subtle differences that can give us
interestinginformation since this type of chart measures the activity in terms oftransactions, but
does not take into account the volume or amount tradedin those transactions. That is, a chart set at
1000 ticks will generate a new candlestickwhen those 1000 ticks occur, but the amount traded in
those 1000transactions will differ. It is possible that 1 contract or several contractsare traded in
one transaction. 1.3.2 VOLUME CHARTS
[FIG 007]
The difference between tick and volume charts has to do with theamount traded. While the tick chart
measures the number of transactionswithout taking into account how many contracts, shares or units
have beentraded in each transaction, the volume charts measure the number ofcontracts, shares or
units traded before the generation of a newcandlestick. For example, a chart set to 1000 volume will
generate a newcandlestick when that amount is traded, regardless of the number of tradesthat were
necessary for its completion. The main negative aspect of using this type of chart is that
itdisables the use of volume analysis techniques. 1.3.3 RANGE CHARTS
[FIG 008]
While the two types previously presented based their representationon volume data, the range chart
is based on price data. This type of chart represents market activity from the point of viewof price
movement. All its bars will be displayed with the same size,regardless of the time it took for their
formation. In high volatilityenvironments more bars will appear and vice versa for low
volatilityenvironments. In case the chart is set to range 15, new bars will appear when theprice
moves 15 ticks in one direction or another


---- SECTION bk2-c4 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.4 ACCUMULATION OR FAILED DISTRIBUTION
1.4 ACCUMULATION OR FAILED DISTRIBUTION When the analysis of all the traces observed on the chart
suggests that theimbalance is occurring towards one side but at the moment of truth theopposite side
presses more aggressively, we will be talking aboutcontinuity failure or failed structure. During
the development of the structures, the control of the marketis at stake and the market may be
changing sides (in favor of buyers orsellers) continuously, depending on the types of traders and
the valuationsthey make of the asset. As we know that until we visualize the effect of a cause we
cannotdetermine what it is (accumulation or distribution), it would almost bemore logical to avoid
using the term failed structure, since a failedaccumulation will always be a distribution structure
and vice versa. But itis a very interesting concept that helps us to understand an importantmarket
dynamic, which is none other than the knowledge of the differenttypes of traders and how they
intervene based on temporality
[FIG 009]
When the price makes a potential Spring at the lows of the structureand from there manages to reach
the top of the structure again, it isobvious that buyers have entered with some aggressiveness down
there;but we do not know when they will decide to close their positions. It maysimply be that they
are very short-term traders who take advantage of thevisit to some liquidity zone (either at the
highs of the structure or at someintermediate zone) to find the counterpart with which to match
theirorders and to close their positions there obtaining profit. This closing ofbuying positions
would cause a loss of bullish momentum and possibly anew downward turn. Or it may be that traders
who have bought at the Spring have alonger-term perspective and will do everything possible to stay
in themarket and defend their position if necessary, producing the fulldevelopment of the
accumulation. In addition, we also do not know if there may be longer-term traders, with a greater
ability to move the markets pending this upwardmovement to take advantage of it and enter
aggressively short. On the other hand, it should also be remembered that not all largetraders win
systematically and recurrently over time. Sometimes many ofthem are forced to take losses and this
failed structure context could be aperfect example. As Al Brooks rightly says in his books on Price
Action,in liquid markets every slightest price movement is generated because onebig trader is buying
and another is selling. It is a battle between theselarge capitals and therefore there will be part
of them that will generate aloss in some of their trading. The key to determine that we are in front
of a failed structure is thatit has absolutely all the traces in favor of one direction but at the
decisivemoment (in the test after the break); it fails and generates an imbalance infavor of the
opposite side. As for the example of failed accumulation, we would have to seethat all the traces
suggest that the market is controlled by the buyers, thatthe price has to develop a Spring
potential, that the bullish breakout isgenuine from the point of view of price action and volume;
but that finallyin the BUEC potential position the price fails to continue rising, and animbalance
in favor of the sellers is provoked, leaving the structure asdistributive.
[FIG 010]
Exactly the same but in reverse we would need to see to determinea failed distribution: traces in
favor of sellers, development of potentialUpthrust, genuine bearish breakout and that in test
position after breakoutaggressive buying enters and rotates the structure as accumulation. It is
important to be aware that we do not know the ability oftraders to continue to control the market
because at any time a trader witha greater capacity can appear and cause the rotation. What at
thebeginning seemed to be unbalanced to one side, finally with this newappearance, the imbalance is
confirmed to the opposite side. So we have these two very important casuistries to evaluate: ❖ We do
not know the intention of the traders who are supporting the current movement. If they are short
term traderswho will close positions in the next liquidity zone or if on thecontrary they have a
longer term perspective and will continueuntil the complete development of the structure. ❖ We do
not know if traders with a higher capacity can step in. At the moment of truth, in the test after
the breakout thatwould confirm the directionality of the structure, aggressivetraders with a greater
ability to move the market by pushing in theopposite direction may appear, since in the longer term
they mayhave a different vision. Obviously we encounter this difficulty continuously, that is whyour
advantage is to operate in favor of the last imbalance and for this it isvital to identify the
dominant event: the shock. The shakeout, as already discussed, is the most determining action in
market functioning. Its underlying logic is so powerful that it leads usto always bias in favor of
it. Then, if the rest of the traces go along with it,we will always favor trading in the direction
of the last shock, i.e. longafter seeing a potential Spring; and short after seeing an Upthrust.
[FIG 011]
Some may conclude that waiting for price at extremes and tradingonly potential Upthrust/Spring
situations is the most convenient way tosimplify the whole analysis; and it's not entirely out of
line. That's thebeauty of the Wyckoff methodology, that by offering a way to understandas
objectively as possible how the market moves, each trader can use itsprinciples to develop their own
strategies. From my point of view, the traces offered by the development ofthe structures from their
inception are significant and help us to establishscenarios with a higher probability. For example,
if I observe certaindistributional characteristics in a structure and it is subsequently in
aposition of potential bearish breakout and potential Spring, the analysis ofthe context will lead
me to favor the bearish breakout; while the traderwho only trades the shocks at the extremes without
evaluating anythingelse will do the opposite. And generally the market will develop (in thisexample)
in favor of the distributive continuation since the imbalance is latent and has been evident during
the development of the range.


---- SECTION bk2-c5 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.5 STRUCTURAL FAILURE
1.5 STRUCTURAL FAILURE It is a very simple concept that can help us to evaluate the dynamics of
themovements. This failure can be found in all types of structures; in structureswith bullish or
bearish slopes as well as in horizontal, convergent ordivergent structures. The first thing to do is
to identify the structural logic that the pricedecides to follow. This will be determined by the
successful touches thatrespect a structure formed by two zones of supply and demand. This is
theinitial key: identify the structure that the price has validated. The moretouches it has, the
more confidence that structure will give us. At that point, and under the principle of favoring the
continuity ofwhat the price has been doing, it would be logical to think that the marketwill
continue to move respecting that structural logic, moving fromextreme to extreme. In the event that
the price fails to develop a new test on the oppositeside and instead generates a turn before
reaching that zone, we will saythat it has developed a structural failure since it has not continued
with thedynamics that it was bringing and this signal adds strength to the scenario in favor of that
last turn.
[FIG 012]
From this concept, it is understood that the event of the last supportof supply or demand (Last
Point of Support and Last Point of Supply) arestructural failures in which the price is blocked in
its attempt to go afterthe shakeout event to start from that point the subsequent movement tobreak
the structure. 1.5.1 WEAKNESS The example of structural failure that denotes weakness is foundwhen
the price, after validating a structure on several occasions, is unableto continue moving under that
logic of movements and cannot reach thetop of the structure. This inability to continue moving as it
had been doing up to thatpoint denotes underlying weakness. Buyers are no longer in control of
themarket and it is the sellers who have begun to appear more significantly.
[FIG 013]
This indication does not suggest an immediate reversal to thedownside; rather, it is one more
element to take into account whencorrectly reading the market context. It could simply be a
temporary halt of the previous trend to developfrom there a period of consolidation during which to
reaccumulate stockand continue rising. 1.5.2 STRENGTH The action that would denote bottom strength
would be obtainedwhen we see that the price cannot reach the bottom of the structure it hasbeen
working on. That is, if the price has been developing a series of lower highs andlower lows whose
action fits perfectly within the upper and lower limits,we will favor that the market continues to
behave in the same way andtherefore we will look for a new test on the opposite side of the
structure.If, for example, it comes from a test on the high side of the structure, thedynamics
suggest that it should now test again on the low side. If duringthe development of such a move the
price turns around without reaching the bottom, we will say that the market has generated a
structural failureand it is a sign of market strength as buyers have not allowed the price tofall
further down.
[FIG 014]
If in addition to this footprint such a move manages to shake outsome relevant previous low we would
be in a potential Spring situationwith greater underlying strength because it conflates with that
structuralfailure. The reasoning behind such action is that buyers have enteredaggressively
unbalancing control in their favor. These buyers have ahigher interest rate and are blocking the
price from falling. They don'twant the price to go down. They don't want anyone else to be able to
ridethe upward move. This indication does not suggest an immediate reversal to theupside; rather it
is one more element to take into account when readingthe market context correctly.


---- SECTION bk2-c6 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.6 SHORTENING OF THE THRUST (SOT)
1.6 SHORTENING OF THE THRUST (SOT) It could be translated into English as "Shortening of the
Thrust". It is apattern of change of direction. It is an analytical tool originally used byWyckoff
to measure the loss of momentum or exhaustion of an impulsivemotion or thrust. Visually it is
observed how each new extreme travels a shorterdistance than the previous extreme and therefore it
is said that the thrust isshortening. ❖ For the uptrend example, we would observe how each new high
travels a shorter distance than the previous high; suggesting somedeterioration in demand and
signaling a possible bearish turn. ❖ For the downtrend example, we would observe a decrease in the
distance the new low travels relative to the distance the previouslow traveled, suggesting some
deterioration in supply andsignaling a possible upward turn. The main idea is a lack of continuity
in that direction; anexhaustion of the forces that so far seemed to be in control of the market.The
loss of momentum anticipates a major pullback and sometimes even areversal of the trend.
[FIG 015]
For this behavior to be valid, a minimum of three thrusts in thedirection of the trend is required.
From three or four momentum moves, itis useful to start looking for this shortening pattern in the
final push. ❖ When the price advance shortens but there is strong volume, it means that the big
effort got little reward: Effort/ResultDivergence. In the case of a bearish example, demand would
beappearing; and in a bullish example, supply would be appearing. ❖ When the price advance shortens
and there is also weak volume, it means exhaustion. In the case of a bearish example, supplywould be
withdrawing; and in a bullish example, it would bebuyers withdrawing from the market. When there are
more than four pushes and shorting persists, thetrend may be too strong to trade against. What would
confirm the change in direction would be a strongimpulsive move in the opposite direction. After the
shortening of thethrust, we want to see the new impulse in the opposite direction have highvolume,
denoting intentionality. After this impulse that changes directiondirection we could wait for a
pullback to seek to join in the direction ofthe new impulsive movement. Always keep in mind the
context in which the shortening of the thrust takes place:
[FIG 016]
If the price breaks the top of a range and reverses, this action is apotential Upthrust. If after a
few bearish waves a shortening of the thrustoccurs and suggests a buy trade; you should keep in mind
that the pricehas just developed an Upthrust and will most likely continue to fall. Anybuy trade
should be avoided, and if taken, closed quickly after a weakresponse. The same thing would happen in
case of observing the bearishpattern after a potential Spring, the directional bias would be marked
bythe shakeout so the SOT short trade idea would have to be questioned. The Shortening of the Thrust
pattern can also be seen in individualbars as well as in moves. In this case, one would observe how
successivebars make less and less progress. If it also coincides in an operating zonewhere we would
be in a position to look for a counter trade for context,the situation would be ideal.
[FIG 017]


---- SECTION bk2-c7 ----
RAW_LABEL: 1.7 OTHER TYPES OF STRUCTURES
1.7 OTHER TYPES OF STRUCTURES Initially, structures with horizontal development have been presented
as abasic schematic. They are the easiest to identify and for the operator whobegins to deepen for
the first time in the Wyckoff methodology I wouldrecommend to work this type of schemes almost
exclusively. As we have already mentioned on several occasions, the market is aliving entity that is
constantly changing due to the continuous interactionbetween supply and demand. This interaction is
what causes thegeneration of structures, which can be developed in different ways. It would make no
sense to approach the market thinking that it mustbehave as established by the basic schemes
initially studied. The reality isthat every moment is unique and will be different from any future
one,since it is practically impossible for the same circumstances to occur attwo different moments.
For two structures to develop in the same way, the sameparticipants should be present at both
moments and behave in exactly thesame way, which is impossible. This is why it is important to be
open-minded and try to go a stepfurther in understanding the methodology. Wyckoff gave us some
guidelines to follow highlighting above all: how markets move; theprocesses of accumulation and
distribution; and the three fundamentallaws. This is the theoretical framework that underpins the
methodology.The Wyckoff trader relies on these tools to analyze the chart in order totry to
elucidate who is in control of the market and thus be able to comeup with judicious scenarios. The
next step is to be able to identify the development of a structureeven if it does not look ideal. On
many occasions we will be able to workin real time with structures that are very genuinely adapted
to the classicstructures studied, but there will be other occasions when this will not bethe case.
And this should not be a cause for disappointment. AdvancedWyckoff traders understand that these
accumulation and distributionprocesses can play out differently depending on how balanced
orunbalanced the market is in favor of buyers and sellers. This is the key to everything. Based on
the condition of the marketat that moment (who has the most control), the price will develop one
typeof structure or another. We will now look at some types of unconventional structures. 1.7.1
SLOPING STRUCTURES Although they are certainly more difficult to see, they actually develop in
exactly the same way as horizontal structures. Do a test; takeone of the examples and mentally try
to rotate the image to fit thestructure as if it were horizontal. You will see that the general
behavior,events and phases have an identical development to the horizontal ranges.The only element
that varies is the market condition, and that is that therewill be situations where either buyers or
sellers will initially have morecontrol. Generally speaking, we are going to take the view that a
structurewith an upward slope suggests some underlying strength, i.e. greaterbuyer control; and that
structures with a downward slope suggest someweakness, i.e. greater seller control.
[FIG 018]
Initially, when identifying the stop Phase A we will establish thelimits of the range horizontally.
If we observe that in Phase B the pricedoes not respect these extremes and begins to move out of the
structure, itwill be time to start thinking about a possible sloping structure. We willconnect these
extremes and observe if the price really respects the limitsof the structure. At other times we will
simply open a chart and it will be very visualhow the price has respected the extremes of a sloping
structure. Connectthe lows and highs of Phases A, B and C. You can draw one end first andclone the
line at the opposite end. The important thing is that the channelcontains virtually all of the price
action within it. The more touches theseextremes have, the more strength that the structure is being
worked(respected).
[FIG 019]
It is important to note that we do not need to see perfect pricetouches at these extremes to
determine that the price is working thatstructure. It does not need to be something totally precise,
the key is that itshould be something that jumps out and allows us to connect all theextremes even
if it is necessary to draw a zone of a certain width, ratherthan a line. Similarly, I would always
recommend not to discard horizontallevels altogether. In particular, they offer me greater
confidence and thereis a chance that the price will re-enter the original structure and we
cancontinue to work it. There are four possible sloping structures that we can find: ❖ Accumulation
structure with an upward slope. ❖ Accumulation structure with bearish slope. ❖ Bearish sloping
distribution structure. ❖ Distribution structure with upward slope.
[FIG 020]
This is the variant that denotes the greatest underlying strength.After the stop Phase A, the price
begins to fluctuate up and down duringthe development of the structure, clearly showing a series of
rising highsand rising lows. Buyers have certain aggressiveness; they value the asset price athigher
levels and do not allow it to fall into oversold areas in order toprotect their position. These
structures are not easy to operate mainly because the overcoming of any previous high will seem to
us that we are facing apotential shock that will turn the market down. But in reality it is the
verynature of the movement: impulses and reversals. And this impression will be even more present in
the BUECpotential zone. Although this is the most conservative entry and gives usgreater security,
visually we see the price trading at very high levels and itdoes not seem to us (subjectively) an
optimal entry point. The market, oblivious to all this, will continue its course and if it isreally
an accumulation process, it will start from there the trendmovement out of the range in search of
higher levels of liquidity. This example of the BTC is very instructive as we can identify oneof the
concepts presented, the structural failure of strength.
[FIG 021]
We see how after the abrupt fall the price accumulates quickly(green box) to start a new structure a
few levels higher. This in itself is asign of underlying strength. We see that there is a very high
volumetraded in that fall and the fact of seeing a subsequent reaction to the risealready suggests
that at least in principle the sentiment is bullish. Ifanalyzing the context we see that below the
current price there are high volumes we could make a simple interpretation as in such volume
haveentered aggressively buyers as otherwise the price could not have movedupwards. Other
interesting footprints that suggested accumulation to us is thedecrease in volume during the
development of the structure and thepredominance of the bullish waves of the Weis indicator. In
addition to this, the key element that marks a before and after inthe reading of the control in this
structure is the Upthrust action. At thetop of the structure it develops a minor distribution
scheme. This patterncould very well have acted as a function of UTAD and triggered thebearish
breakout. This is the behavior we expect to happen after ashakeout, but what we see is a total
inability to fall. After this minordistributive scheme the price fails to even reach the bottom of
that upwardsloping structure it has been working on, and this is nothing more or lessthan a
structural failure of strength. Then it develops an internal shakeout that acts as a test event
inPhase C causing the final imbalance and continuation to the upside. Also noteworthy is the
location of the High Volume Node and theVPOC of the structure. How the price is unable to cross this
high tradingzone, suggesting the control of the bulls. We will talk about these VolumeProfile zones
later.
[FIG 022]
Here we see another example of a bullish sloping cumulativepattern. In this case the slope is quite
steep suggesting that the currentmarket condition is quite strong. We see the final stop without
climatic volume (Selling Exhaustion)and how from then on the price starts a clear succession of
rising highsand rising lows. Decreasing volume during the development of Phases Aand B suggesting
absorption. It finds it difficult to position above theHigh Volume Node but once it gets it after
the shakeout continues toshow strength and manages to break to the upside with good
bullishcandlesticks (SOSbar). Very interesting as the Back Up develops over the top of thestructure
(Creek) in confluence with an operating level of volume (weeklyVWAP).
[FIG 023]
This is the cumulative variant with the greatest weakness. Thebearish slope, that dynamic of
declining highs and lows, already denotes atotal control of bearish traders. Weakness is latent, but
even so, buyersfinally appear and provoke the cumulative denouement. After observing the appearance
of the first trend stop events, theweakness will be so high that the market will not be able to
withstand thedevelopment of a horizontal structure and instead signs of weakness willbegin to
appear, generating lower and lower lows. Structurally, the price will respect the bearish dynamics,
fluctuatingbetween the upper and lower extremes of the channel. The new lows willtravel a decreasing
distance, visually observing a very common pattern oftrend exhaustion (Shortening of the Thrust). In
addition, quite possibly the market will develop some kind ofstructural failure where at a certain
point in time the price abandons thedynamics that would lead it to visit the bottom of the structure
and insteadfinds support somewhere in between. Possibly it has made a floor and isready to start the
uptrend movement. What would confirm the SOT pattern and structural failure wouldbe for price to now
develop strong upside momentum. Preferably wewould want to see this momentum effectively break the
bearish structurechanging the market dynamics. Now it would be the time to wait for abearish
pullback to look to join in favor of the imbalance caused by thebuyers. In this example we see how
the price is respecting the extremes byturning up and down. As we have already said, the
identification of thistype of structures is subjective so they should be very visual and notforced.
The idea is that they contain most of the price action.
[FIG 024]
A detail to highlight in this chart is how the monthly VWAP acts.This is the darkest dynamic level
and as can be seen the price reacts on itevery time it interacts. From the first touch on the
Secondary Test, theprice stays consistently above it, a trace that would suggest some controlon the
part of the buyers. As always, the key event is the total Shakeout that causes thedevelopment of the
effect built on that cause. After said Shakeout theprice develops a LPS above the VPOC of the
structure, which is followed by the JAC and the Back Up that again is going to look for a
confluencezone (weekly VWAP and Value Area High) to from there continue thedevelopment in Phase E
out of the range. These zones and volume operating levels will be discussed in detailbelow. Here we
observe another clear cumulative structure with a bearishslope full of details.
[FIG 025]
After the Phase A stop we see how the price mainly trades at thebottom of the range being unable to
make any kind of test to the top,which suggests some underlying weakness. Gradually the
volumedecreases with respect to that seen in the SC and after the appearance ofthe Shakeout a sign
of strength is now able to send the price to the top(minor Sign of Strength). At that point we can
already see how the lows of Phases A, B and Ctravel a ridiculous distance to the downside,
suggesting the appearance ofthe Shortening Of the Thrust (SOT) pattern and its bullish implication
inthis case. Although the first upward move is not strong enough to break thestructure, it is
already a certain change of character to have succeeded inmaking such a test. At that point the
price develops an internal shock to aprevious high in confluence with the weekly VWAP but this time
themarket is unable to test the bottom of the structure, developing a structuralfailure of strength
evidenced in that LPS. Objectively we already have theShakeout, the strength sample and the
structural failure = potentialimbalance in favor of buyers. From then on and through two shows of
strength the price managesto break the range and we see how it will look for a confluence zone
todevelop the test after the breakout (Back Up). This zone is composed ofthe Creek of the broken
structure, the weekly VWAP (green dynamic line)and the Value Area High of the profile. Another
example of thefunctionality of this type of operating levels supported by the context.
[FIG 026]
This is the distributive structure with the greatest weakness. Afterthe identification of the first
events that suggest the stop of the previoustrend movement, the strong condition of weakness that
floods the marketwill cause the development of the subsequent movements in the form ofdeclining
highs and lows. Visually, a bearish channel will be observed where the pricebounces at its extremes
respecting the dynamics. The key, as always, will be in the correct identification of the Testevent
in Phase C that gives rise to the bearish breakout movement. Wewill constantly be looking for this
test event to do so in the form of ashakeout (in this case, Upthrust After Distribution -UTAD-). It
hasalready been mentioned countless times that it is the event that can givegreater confidence to a
trader when proposing scenarios and therefore inmost cases we should wait for its appearance. This
final shakeout can be expected either in the form of anovershoot at the top of the structure
suggesting an overbought condition;or as a local shakeout to some relevant previous high. The more
showyand exaggerated the shakeout, the more confidence it will give us as itwill suggest that it has
captured greater liquidity and therefore thesubsequent move will have greater momentum. The main
difference with respect to the cumulative structures thatalso have a bearish slope is that in this
case we will not observe that lossof momentum characteristic of the Shortening Of the Thrust
pattern, norwill we see any kind of structural failure. It is certainly a difficult type of scenario
to trade as subjectively thetrader observes how the price is relatively low and may determine that
itis not the place to go short. But we must work to eliminate subjectivities and remain with the
certain objectivity that this type of reading provides. Due to the almost total control that sellers
have, the price will movewith great speed. We must be fully focused otherwise we will most
likelymiss the move. And this is not bad news because if you have been able tomake a correct reading
and see that the imbalance is in favor of thebearish, you may lose the trading opportunity for not
being quick in yourdecisions, but at least you will not be in a position to enter on the wrongside
of the market (buying) thus avoiding a loss.
[FIG 027]
In this example of redistribution with bearish slope we see that thestop occurs with a large volume
during the entire development of Phase Aand that during Phase B we also observe unusual volume
peaks,characteristic footprint of distributive schemes. In addition to that thebearish waves Weis
predominating at all times. The price manages to position itself below the high volume nodeand a
subsequent upward retracement movement will test this area leavingthe Last Point of Supply event to
generate the effective bearish breakout(SOW) from there. Once below the structure, a new test to the
lower partof the structure and continuation of the fall. A trader who does not take into account
this dynamic of structuresand who does not know how to analyze judiciously all the traces
withinhimself would most likely see the price fall, away from the VWAP, in apossible oversold
condition and perhaps have a bullish bias. But the truthis that the market at all times was flooded
with weakness and this wasreflected in the price action and volume.
[FIG 028]
New example of distributive scheme with very characteristicfootprints. Volume spikes, predominant
Weis and a Phase C jerk thatoriginates the bearish breakout movement. The UTAD test happens at a
very important location, at the VPOCof the range. It is the most traded price level. Moreover, it
converges withthe top of the structure. It is the ideal location to look for a short trigger.Another
example of how the Volume Profile can help us to better analyzethe market context. Such was the
underlying weakness that there was no possibility of atest after a breakout (LPSY) on the lower part
of the structure. UPWARD SLOPING DISTRIBUTION STRUCTURE
[FIG 029]
This type of dynamics initially presents certain backgroundstrength, evidenced by that succession of
rising highs and rising lows untilin its final development the aggressiveness of the sellers becomes
evidentrotating the structure as distributive. As discussed in the previous structures, a useful
tool for itsevaluation can be the identification of the Shortening of the Thrustpattern. In this
case, the price may make new highs but travel littledistance from the previous highs, denoting that
lack of momentum. If it also leaves some kind of structural failure that denotesweakness (does not
reach the top of the structure), it is a further indicationthat suggests that control may be
rotating to the bearish. As always, the reading will be enhanced by observing a shakeout(UTAD)
either to the upper end of the structure in the form of anovershoot reaching an overbought
condition; or to some relevant priorhigh. Let's not forget the analysis of complementary tools that
analyzevolume data, such as Volume Profile and Weis wave analysis either. Thelocation of the
operating zones of the Volume Profile will always help usin making decisions, while the wave
analysis will allow us to put themagnifying glass on the interest traded in the movements and
willsometimes be key to a correct analysis.
[FIG 030]
Example of distributive structure with upward slope and withoutextreme shakeout. As more important
details we see that climatic volumein the middle of the range. It is a warning sign as they should
not appearas a general rule in cumulative schemes and therefore could be a footprintto add in favor
of bearish control. Very visual also the Shortening of the Thrust pattern between thehighs set by
the AR in Phase A, the UT in Phase B and the UTAD inPhase C. New highs but with little movement
between them suggestingthat loss of momentum. On the Phase C UTAD we see how the price tries to
leave the valuearea of the Composite profile and is rejected. The market is not interestedin trading
at higher prices and a new signal is added in favor of sellers. This action could also be seen as
the test event in Phase C where it shakesout highs from within the structure. No doubt this is a
difficult scheme totrade in real time. After a first movement of weakness the price manages to
positionitself below the VPOC of the profile and this action is accompanied with alarge bearish Weis
wave. At that point the directional bias should be clearand we are already in a position to propose
a short trade idea. Again we see the great importance of taking into account thevolume levels. The
test after breakout (LPSY) is going to look for theconfluence zone of the broken structure and the
VPOC to start from therethe bearish continuation in Phase E.
[FIG 031]
This time the test event in Phase C if it manages to reach the top ofthe structure shaking all the
highs of the same. As we know, this actionadds further strength to the bearish scenario. It is very
striking the degree of bullish slope, suggesting at thebeginning of the same a great strength in the
background. Strength that isdissipated and blocked with the appearance of the volume peaks duringthe
development of Phase C. Unquestionable sign of weakness that sends the price to the originof the
movement in the AR and also manages to develop a new bearishleg. Not before going to visit twice the
most traded volume level (VPOC)of the structure to continue trading down from there. Once again,
this isan impressive demonstration of the effectiveness of these volume levels. All the concepts
related to the Volume Profile and its tradingimplications will be explained in depth in the last
part of the book. 1.7.2 UNUSUAL SCHEMES Within this category we will include all other structures
that do notfollow a horizontal or sloping formation. If we wanted to get exquisite we could frame as
Wyckoffmethodology structures practically all accumulation or distribution rangesregardless of their
shape, including the classic charting patterns that we allknow such as head and shoulders, wedges,
triangles and so on. From my point of view trying to justify every single move andstructure
development under the Wyckoff methodology approach doeshim no favors. Wyckoff has little to do with
those robotic patterns, Hisstudy is much deeper so the smartest thing to do would be to
distanceoneself from that possible link that may associate the classic chartistpatterns with the
Wyckoff method. With the benefit of hindsight, as they say, any range can be labeledwith some
success. But this is operationally invalid. Labeling past charts is a very interesting exercise for
initiated traders in order to put theirknowledge into practice and to feed their subconscious to
prepare it forreal time trading. But once you have a certain level of study of themethodology,
continuing to label past charts becomes meaningless The key is that any structure, if we force
ourselves a little, can beturned into a nice structure that would fit perfectly into the events
andphases of the Wyckoff methodology. But our focus should not be here,what good is it for me to
know the location of the labels in a hypodermic(V-shaped) turn of the market if in real time I am
not going to be able totrade it? As I say, it is a waste of time and energy to try to study
unusualstructures, mainly because, as the name suggests, they do not appear withany regularity. Our
advantage is to wait for classical structures to appear. Classic structures, with a strict
development of their events andphases, but at the same time allowing certain fluidity based on
theparticular conditions of the market. The perfect example of this statementwould be the structures
with slope: classic formations where all eventsand phases are perfectly observed, and at the same
time the backgroundcondition slightly modifies the final development (some bullish or
bearishdynamics)
[FIG 032]
This chart of the FDAX is a very good example of what I amtalking about. Once its development is
complete I can go back and labelevery single move if I want, but in real time it is virtually
impossiblebehavior to trade. A structure locked at lows but developing rising highsin turn. It makes
no sense to put the focus there. Besides this type of inoperable structures, it is a good time
toremember that theory and practice in real time often do not go hand inhand and that it is
necessary to have a sufficiently open mind.
[FIG 033]
In this chart of the SP500, while it is true that a very genuinestructure is observed in its final
part, many in real time may haveencountered difficulties when trying to identify Phase A. Price
comes up, develops a broad bearish move, and from thereanother further upward move that surpasses
the previous high. Could thatsuccession be the BC, AR, ST? It could, but that is not what is
relevant.What is relevant is that a change in character has occurred; that the pricehas moved from a
trending to a sideways state and that a cause is going tobe built back up which will have an effect.
This is all that matters, thecontext behind the price action. Many may still only look for
"textbook" structures and, althoughwe see them appearing all the time, the reading offered by
themethodology is much more interesting than just staying there
[FIG 034]
Here is another example of exactly the same. If we observe themarket from a strict point of view
seeking to identify the perfectmovements framed within the proportionality that in theory there
shouldbe between phases, we may have problems in identifying them when wesee this type of
development. If we treat these three movements that I mark as the SC, AR andST, Phase B would have
very little duration since the only objective eventthat is observed on the graph is the s shakeout
of Phase C. What do we dothen if the theory tells us that Phase B should be longer than Phases A
andC? Well then nothing, theory is all very well for generalizing events, butreal time trading and
analysis will require a much more open mind. Once the trader reaches a certain degree of
understanding of themethodology he should focus on seeing the market in terms of pricedynamics and
not in terms of labels.

