==== PART bk2-p4 ====
RAW_LABEL: PART 4. THE IMPORTANCE OF VOLUME


---- SECTION bk2-c18 ----
RAW_LABEL: 4.1 AUCTION MARKET THEORY
4.1 AUCTION MARKET THEORY Auction theory, as it is known in English, was born mainly from thestudies
by J.P. Steidlmayer on the Market Profile. Subsequently, togetherwith other authors such as James
Dalton and Donald L. Jones, he defineda series of concepts that constitute this theory. It is based
on the fact that the market, with the priority objective offacilitating negotiation among its
participants and under the principles ofthe law of supply and demand, will always move in search of
efficiency,also known as equilibrium or fair value. Efficiency means that buyers and sellers are
comfortablenegotiating and neither has clear control. That comfort comes because,based on current
market conditions, the valuations of both are verysimilar. The way this equilibrium is visually
observed on a price chart iswith a continuous rotation (price ranges). This price
lateralizationrepresents this equilibrium. It is evidence of the facilitation of trading andis the
state in which the market is always looking to be. On the other hand, we have the moments of
inefficiency orimbalance and these are represented in the trend movements. When newinformation
reaches the market, it can cause the value perceived by both buyers and sellers of the asset to
change, generating a disagreementbetween them. One of the two will take control and move the price
awayfrom the previous equilibrium zone, offering a profitable tradingopportunity. What is evident in
this context is that the market is notfacilitating trading and is therefore considered an
inefficient condition.
[FIG 070]
The market will be constantly moving in search and confirmationof value; in situations where buyers
and sellers are in a position toexchange stock. When this happens it is because the valuations that
theseparticipants have on the price are very similar. At that moment thenegotiation will again
generate a new equilibrium zone. This cycle willrepeat itself over and over again in an
uninterrupted manner. The general idea is that the market will move from oneequilibrium area to
another through trend movements and that these willbe initiated when the market sentiment of both
buyers and sellers aboutthe current value differs causing the imbalance. The market will nowbegin
the search for the next area that generates consensus among themajority of participants about the
security. It should be noted that the market spends most of its time duringperiods of equilibrium,
which is logical due to the nature of the marketbased on favoring negotiation among its
participants. This is where theaccumulation and distribution processes take place, which as we all
knowis where the Wyckoff methodology focuses. 4.1.1 VARIABLES The auction process in the financial
markets is fundamentally basedon value. In order to try to decipher where such value is found,
threeadditional elements need to be evaluated: In the auction mechanism price is used as a discovery
tool. Thefacilitation of trading is carried out by price movement, which fluctuatesup and down
exploring different levels with the objective of seeing howparticipants react to such exploration.
These price movements herald opportunities. If the participantsrespond to this exploration by
observing the price as fair, it will provokenegotiation between them. Conversely, if these
discoveries of new pricelevels are not perceived as attractive to both participants, it will lead
torejection. TIME When the market promotes an opportunity (reaches an attractivelevel), it will use
time to regulate the duration that the opportunity will beavailable. The price will spend very
little time in those zones that areadvantageous to one of the two sides (buyers or sellers). A zone
of efficiency or equilibrium will be characterized by ahigher consumption of time; while a zone of
inefficiency or imbalancewill be represented by a short consumption of time. Volume represents the
activity, the amount of an asset that has beenexchanged. This quantity suggests the interest or
disinterest at certainlevels. Based on volume there are areas that are more valuable than others.The
basic rule is that the more activity a certain area sees, the higher thevalue assigned to it by
market participants. Pr ice + Time + Vo lume = Va lue These three elements are responsible for
giving us a logicalperspective on, based on current conditions, where market participantsconsider
the value of a particular asset to be. Through price the market discovers new levels, time
consumptionsuggests that there is some acceptance in that new area and finally volumegeneration
confirms that participants have created a new value zone wherethey trade comfortably. As we know,
conditions are changeable and therefore continuousre-evaluation of these elements is needed. Knowing
where the value is akey as it defines the market condition and based on this we will be able toput
forward different trading ideas. 4.1.2 PERCEPTION OF VALUE The market is constantly rotating between
two phases: horizontaldevelopment (equilibrium) or vertical development (imbalance).Horizontal
development suggests agreement among participants whilevertical development is a market in search of
value, in search ofparticipants to negotiate with. The fact that the price is moving comfortably in
a trading range(horizontal development) represents acceptance in that zone, it is a contextwhere
price and value coincide according to the participants. When themarket is in a trending state
(vertical development) price and value do notcoincide; in this context price will move ahead and
value will follow ornot (as a sign of acceptance and rejection).
[FIG 071]
In an equilibrium area the fairest price will be located in the middleand the extremes both above
and below will represent levels that areunfair or not accepted by the participants. Since the
fairest value is located in the middle of the range, a moveto the upper end will be seen by buyers
as an expensive price and at thesame time sellers will consider it cheap, so their actions will lead
to sendthe price back to the fairest zone. Similarly a visit to the lower end of therange will be
seen as cheap by buyers and expensive by sellers, leading to a further turn to the upside. It is
nothing more or less than the typical range trading that we allknow where you look to buy at lows
and sell at highs hoping that the pricewill continue to reject those extremes. And normally the
market willcontinue to do so until its condition changes. The interesting thing comes when an
imbalance occurs and theprice leaves the value zone. What will happen then? When the price leaves a
trading zone achange in the perception of value can happen. The trader's task is now to assess
whether these new price quotelevels are accepted or rejected. Price is ahead of the other two
variables indetermining potential areas of value, but it is time in the first instance andvolume in
the last instance that will confirm whether that new area isaccepted or rejected. We interpret
acceptance to a new area when the price manages tohold (time consuming) and contracts begin to be
exchanged betweenbuyers and sellers (volume), all this represented as a certain lateralizationof the
price. Conversely, we would identify rejection when the pricequickly reverts back to its old value
area denoting lack of interest andevidenced by a sharp turn. All horizontal developments end when
there is no longer agreementamong the participants about the value; while all vertical
developmentsend when the price reaches a zone where there is agreement among themagain. This is the
continuous cycle of the market. This idea in itself is verypowerful and with the right approach
trading strategies could be builtaround it. As with one of the universal principles of technical
analysis (pricediscounts everything), we do not need to go into what actually producesthis change in
the participants' perception of value. We know that basedon the current conditions, based on the
information available at thatprecise moment, all participants give a valuation to the price of the
asset.Subsequently, something may happen at a fundamental level that changesthis perception, but the
beauty of this approach is that it removes us fromthe need to know and interpret what has happened
to change theparticipants' perception. It is important to emphasize that this auction theory is
universal andcan therefore be used to evaluate any type of financial market, regardlessof the time
frame used. 4.1.3 THE FOUR STEPS OF MARKET ACTIVITY This is a process with which Steidlmayer
represented the differentphases through which the market passes during the development of
itsmovements. The four phases are: 1. Trend phase. Vertical development, price in imbalance in
favorof one direction. 2. Stopping phase. Traders begin to appear in the oppositedirection and the
stop of the previous trend movement occurs. The limits of the upper and lower range are established.
3. Lateralization phase. Horizontal development. Trading aroundthe stop price and within the limits
of the new equilibrium range. 4. Transition phase. The price leaves the range and a newimbalance
begins in search of value. This movement may be areversal or a continuation of the previous trend
movement.
[FIG 072]
Once the transition phase is over, the market is in a position to starta new cycle. This protocol
will run uninterrupted and is observable in alltime frames. Visually up to step three a P or
b-shaped profile would be observed.The formation of this type of profile as well as the proposal of
a type ofoperative based on it will be seen in more depth later. Structural traders will be familiar
with this four-step protocolbecause it is essentially exactly the development from Phase A to Phase
Eproposed by the Wyckoff methodology: 1. Stop the previous trend 2. Build the cause 3. Assess the
opposition 4. Initiate the trend movement 5. Confirm directionality
[FIG 073]
Although Richard Wyckoff, as well as his later students and othertraders who have contributed to the
dissemination of his ideas were basedsolely on analytical tools and principles of technical
analysis, we see thatthey already implicitly worked these concepts proposed in the auctiontheory
even if they did not use such terms. That is why it is considered the only technical analysis
approachbased on a real underlying logic: auction theory and the law of supply anddemand.


---- SECTION bk2-c19 ----
RAW_LABEL: 4.2 THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND
4.2 THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND This is the basic law on which the auction theory is based and
thereforegoverns all price changes. Initially the studies that Richard Wyckoffproposed on this law
told us that: ❖ If demand was greater than supply, the price of the product would rise. ❖ If supply
was greater than demand, the price of the product would go down. ❖ If supply and demand were in
equilibrium, the price of the product would remain the same. 4.2.1 COMMON ERRORS OF INTERPRETATION
This idea is very general and should be qualified since a series ofconceptual errors have been
generated around this law of supply and demand. Error No. 1: Prices rise because there are more
buyers thansellers or fall because there are more sellers than buyers. In the market there are
always the same number of buyers andsellers; since for someone to buy, there must be someone to sell
to him.No matter how much someone wants to buy, as long as there is no sellerwilling to offer the
counterpart, it is impossible for the negotiation to takeplace. The key lies in the attitude
(aggressive or passive) that traders takewhen participating in the market. Error No. 2: Prices go up
because there is more demand thansupply or they go down because there is more supply thandemand. The
problem with this statement is to call demand everything thathas to do with buying and supply
everything that has to do with selling. Inreality they are different concepts and it is convenient
to separate themwhen referring to one or the other. Supply and Demand are the limit orders that both
buyers and sellersplace in the BID and ASK columns pending execution, which is known asliquidity.
4.2.2 BID/ASK, SPREAD AND LIQUIDITY There is no single price in financial markets. This is obvious
but notunderstood by many people. When a participant goes to the market, hefinds two prices: the
buying and the selling price. BID. The BID column is the part of the order book where buyerscome to
place their bid (limit buy orders) and where sellers come to matchtheir ask orders. The highest
price level within the BID column is knownas the Best BID and represents the best price at which to
sell. ASK. The ASK column is the part of the order book where sellersgo to place their pending sell
(bid) orders and where buyers go to find thecounterpart for their purchases. The lowest price level
within the ASKcolumn is known as the Best ASK and represents the best price at whichto buy.
[FIG 074]
Therefore, it is the order execution mechanism that determines theprice. The difference between the
BID and the ASK is called the Spreadand is an indicator to be taken into account to assess the
liquidity of the asset. The lower the Spread, the more liquid it is. Liquidity is an extremely
important concept. It is the amount ofvolume that an asset trades. We should try to trade assets the
more liquidthe better, as this will mean that it will be more difficult for a largeindividual trader
to have the ability to move the price. It is therefore ameasure to avoid possible manipulation. If
you are trading an asset thattrades very little volume, it is likely that if a large institution
enters, it canmove the price with relative ease. These environments should be avoided. 4.2.3 TYPES
OF PARTICIPANTS BASED ON THEIR BEHAVIOR The key element that clarifies the errors in the
interpretation of theLaw of Supply and Demand is the behavior of traders, since they canparticipate
in the market in different ways: ❖ Aggressive. Liquidity takers through the use of "at market"
orders. They have urgency to enter and attack the Best BID andBest ASK where the limit orders remain
located. This type ofaggressive orders is the real engine of the market since they arethe ones that
initiate the transactions. ❖ Passive. Liquidity creators through the use of "limit" orders. Sellers
create supply by leaving their orders pending execution inthe ASK column; and buyers create demand
by leaving theirorders placed in the BID column.
[FIG 075]
4.2.4 HOW DOES PRICE MOVEMENT OCCUR? We come then to the moment of examining what must happen forthe
price to move. The idea here is clear: it takes the aggressiveparticipation of traders to produce a
change in price. Passive ordersrepresent intent in the first instance, and if executed they have the
abilityto stop a move, but not the ability to make the price move. This requiresinitiative.
INITIATIVE For the price to move upwards, buyers have to buy all the sell (bid)orders that are
available at that price level and also continue to buyaggressively to force the price up one level
to find new sellers to tradewith. Passive buy orders cause the downward movement to slow down,but by
themselves cannot drive the price up. The only orders that have theability to move the price upwards
are buy-to-market orders or thosewhose crossing orders become buy-to-market orders (such as stop
losseson short positions).
[FIG 076]
For the price to move downward, sellers have to acquire all the buy(demand) orders that are
available at that price level and continue to pushdownward forcing the price to go in search of
buyers at lower levels. Passive sell orders cause the upward movement to slow down, butdo not have
the ability to drive the price down on their own. The only orders that have the ability to move the
price downward are market sellsor those whose crossing orders become market sells (Stop Loss of
longpositions). The price needs aggressiveness to move, but it is very interesting totake into
account also that the lack of interest from the opposite side canfacilitate this task. An absence of
supply can facilitate the price rise just as an absenceof demand can facilitate its fall.
[FIG 077]
As supply withdraws, this lack of interest will be represented asfewer contracts placed in the ASK
column and therefore the price canmore easily move upward with very little buying power. Conversely,
if it is demand that withdraws, it will be visualizedwith a reduction in the contracts that buyers
have placed in the BID andthis will cause the price to be able to move lower with very little
sellinginitiative. 4.2.5 HOW DO MARKET TURNS OCCUR? Keep in mind that the market, in order to
facilitate trading, will goup in search of sellers and down in search of buyers; in other words,
itwill always move towards the equilibrium point where supply anddemand will be equalized.
[FIG 078]
Moreover, logic leads us to think that as the price rises, the interestof buyers decreases (they see
the price as increasingly more expensive)and the interest of sellers increases (they see the price
as increasinglycheaper); and as the price falls, the interest of sellers decreases and that ofbuyers
increases. In a rising market, as long as the buying initiative is able toconsume all the liquidity
(supply) found at higher levels, the price willcontinue to rise. On the other hand, in bear markets,
as long as the sellinginitiative is able to consume all the liquidity (demand) found at lowerlevels,
the price will continue to fall. At the moment of a market turn, we will normally always have
athree-step process: 1. Exhaustion 2. Absorption 3. Initiative
[FIG 079]
To reverse an upward movement, the lack of interest (exhaustion)of the buyers to continue buying,
the first entry of sale by the bigoperators in a passive way (absorption) and the aggressiveness
(initiative)of the sellers will be combined. Oppositely for the bullish turn example: sellers'
exhaustion, passivepositioning through absorption of sales and buying initiative withaggression in
the ASK. In essence this three-step protocol is nothing more thanaccumulation and distribution
processes regardless of the time scale onwhich they take place.


---- SECTION bk2-c20 ----
RAW_LABEL: 4.3 ORDER TYPES
4.3 ORDER TYPES When participating in the market we can do so mainly by using fourdifferent types of
orders.
[FIG 080]
❖ Market. Aggressive order that is executed at the best available buy and sell price (Best BID/ASK).
Immediate execution thatguarantees the entry to the market but not the specific price atwhich it has
been entered due to the constant change in thequotation and the application of the Spread. ❖ Limit.
Passive order that is executed at a specific price. Entry at that specific price is guaranteed but
execution is not guaranteed. That is, the price may never visit that level and therefore wewould not
enter the market. As long as they are not executed,they can be removed at any time. ❖ Stop. A
passive order that is executed at a specific price. When the price reaches it, it becomes a market
order and is thereforeexecuted at the best available price (Best BID/ASK). ❖ Stop-Limit. Combines
the features of Limit and Stop orders. Once a certain price level is reached (Stop orders function),
anorder is generated at a specific level (Limit orders function).Operationally, it works exactly the
same as Limit orders. Based on the four types of orders we have just seen, the followingis the full
spectrum of basic orders available depending on the intentionand what it is used for: ❖ Buy Market.
Aggressive order at the current price. It is used to: Enter the market on buy. Close a sell position
(either at a profit or loss). ❖ Buy Stop. Pending order above the current price. It is used to:
Enter the market on buy. Close a sell position (by Stop Loss). ❖ Buy Limit. Pending order below the
current price. It is used for: Enter the market on buy. Close a sell position (by Take Profit). ❖
Buy Stop Limit. Pending order below the price after reaching a level. It is used to: Enter the
market to buy. Close a sell position (by Take Profit). ❖ Sell Market. Aggressive order at the
current price. It is used to: Enter the market on sell. Close a buy position (either in profit or
loss). ❖ Sell Stop. Pending order below the current price. It is used to: Enter the market on sell.
Close a buy position (by Stop Loss). ❖ Sell Limit. Pending order above the current price. It is used
to: Enter the market on sell. Close a buy position (by Take Profit). ❖ Sell Stop Limit. Pending
order above the price after reaching a level. It is used to: Enter the market to sell. Close a buy
position (by Take Profit). 4.3.1 ADVANCED FEATURES There are certain advanced instructions that can
be applied,depending on the broker, to orders to enter and exit the market: One-Cancels-Other (OCO).
Entering two orders to the marketwith one of them being cancelled when the other is executed. Order-
Sends-Order (OSO). Instruction to execute secondaryorders when the initial one is executed. Market-
To-Limit (MTL). Execution of a market order thatincludes an instruction to place a limit order at
the same price with theremainder of the position if it is not fully executed. Market-If-Touched
(MIT). Execution of a market order thatincludes an instruction to place a limit order at the same
price with theremainder of the position if it is not fully executed. Limit-If-Touched (LIT).
Conditional order to trade with a pendingorder (Limit) when a specific level is reached. It is used
to buy above thecurrent price and to sell below the current price. Good-Til-Cancelled (GTC). It
includes a temporary executionperiod which is usually the duration of the session. If at that point
theorder has not been executed, it will be cancelled. Good-Til-Date (GTD). The order remains active
until a specificdate. Immediate-Or-Cancel (IOC). Instruction to execute the orderimmediately. If any
portion of the order remains unfilled, that portion iscancelled. Fill-Or-Kill (FOK). It does not
allow partial execution. When theprice is reached, it either enters the market with full volume or
is cancelled. All-Or-None (AON). Similar to the FOK orders with the differencethat in case the price
reaches it and it is not executed because it cannotcover all its volume, it remains active until it
obtains all the counterpart orit is cancelled by the trader. At-The-Opening (ATO). Instruction to
execute an order at theopening of the session. If this is not possible, it is cancelled. At-The-
Close (ATC). Instruction to execute an order at the close ofthe session.


---- SECTION bk2-c21 ----
RAW_LABEL: 4.4 TOOLS FOR VOLUME ANALYSIS
4.4 TOOLS FOR VOLUME ANALYSIS Thanks to certain tools that analyze the flow of orders we can see all
theinteraction between buyers and sellers who participate in the market indifferent ways. We will
mainly distinguish them by the type of orders they dealwith as not all these tools are based on the
same data: ❖ Analysis of pending orders: Order Book, also called Depth of Market (DOM). ❖ Analysis
of executed orders: Time & Sales and Footprint. We will point out their most important
characteristics in order toprovide the reader with a basic knowledge of the peculiarities of each
one. 4.4.1 ORDER BOOK Identifies all pending orders for execution (liquidity) that arelocated in the
BID and ASK columns; as we already know, the BID represents pending buy orders and the ASK
represents pending sellorders.
[FIG 081]
As these types of software only have Level II of depth, mostmarkets can only show ten levels of
liquidity above and below the currentprice. This is relevant because beyond those ten levels there
will still beliquidity located, but it is only visible to those who have Level III of depth(mainly
liquidity providers). The analysis of the order book presents some problems. One ofthem is that the
visible liquidity is never the liquidity that is actuallylocated in those levels. The liquidity that
can be seen in the order bookcomes only from limit orders. By their very nature, market orders
cannot be seen anywhere, since they are born from an initiative and are executedinstantaneously. On
the other hand, Stop orders, as they become a marketorder when their price is reached, are not
displayed in the Order Bookeither. In addition to this, as we have seen in the advanced features
ofsome orders, there are certain instructions that are not displayed in theOrder Book either, so
that in reality we would be analyzing a not veryhigh percentage of the total orders pending
execution. Another major problem with the analysis of the order book or anyother tool based on this
liquidity data is that these orders that are pendingexecution can be removed by whoever placed them
there at any timebefore they are executed. Due to this peculiarity different forms ofmanipulation
carried out by algorithms emerged: This is the placement of huge amounts of contracts in the BID
andASKS columns (limit orders) without the intention of actually executingthem. The aim is to give
the impression of an "insurmountable barrier"and cause the price to move to the opposite side. They
are false ordersbecause when the price is about to reach its level, they are cancelled andare not
executed. It is an interesting concept that highlights the value of the ability oflimit orders with
respect to price movement. As we have mentioned, limitorders by themselves and by their very nature
do not have the ability tomove the market, but using this form of manipulative activity we see how
the price can move influenced by them at certain times. Not directly basedon their execution, but
indirectly based on their influence. Imagine that you normally see limit orders of around 50
contractsper price level. What will the other participants think if you suddenly see500 contracts?
Well, most logically they will see that this is a too highprice to pay for the price to cross that
level and most likely cause a lack ofinterest to go against such orders. And of course, this will
result in a movein the opposite direction of the huge order. Manipulation by large tradersto drive
the price in the direction they want. This is the splitting of a large limit order into smaller
portions. Themotivation for this type of action has to do with wanting to hide the actualsize of the
original order. Mainly used by institutional traders who want to execute a hugenumber of contracts
in a given price range and who use algorithmsprogrammed with this technology to be able to do so
passively andwithout turning the price against them. It is important to note that there isonly one
source behind such an order, just one large trader, not acollection of them. It is very visual to
take the example of a real Iceberg. On thesurface what you see is a seemingly normal amount of
contracts, but whatyou don't know is that this order is simply a part of a much, much largerone. And
when this small part is filled by the market the large orderquickly replenishes it. This is the
clearest example of what a takeover would look like.There may be many aggressive buyers pushing the
ASK and all those BuyMarkets are crossing the Sell Limits of an Iceberg order which do notallow the
price to move up. We will say that a takeover of these purchasesis taking place. 4.4.2 TAPE Thanks
to Time & Sales we can see in real time all the crossing oforders already executed. The analysis of
the tape becomes very complexdue to the speed at which the current markets move (mainly
futuresmarkets).
[FIG 082]
Depending on the software we can access different types ofinformation. It usually includes at least
the columns with the time ofexecution, the price level and the number of contracts. It can certainly
be useful for the identification of large volumesexecuted in a single order, known as "big trade".
More modern versionsalso allow the grouping of orders executed in blocks, pointing to the sametrader
as the origin of different transactions spaced in time. A positive point of the Tape with respect to
the Order Book is thatthe tape represents the past, the orders already executed and therefore is not
susceptible to manipulation. Operating solely by analyzing the tape is not within everyone'sreach
since it requires enormous experience as well as a great capacity forconcentration due to the speed
at which it moves. 4.4.3 FOOTPRINT When most people refer to Order Flow they are actually referring
tothis section of the order flow, the use of Footprint. Order Flow is a generalterm that, as the
name suggests, is concerned with order flow.
[FIG 083]
The Footprint charts the data provided by the tape (orders alreadyexecuted) and represents them in a
much more visual way. It would belike putting a magnifying glass inside the candlesticks and
observing thenumber of contracts executed at each price level.. The advantage of analyzing the
Footprint is that it allows us to quantify in maximum detail the interaction between buyers and
sellers.Observing the balance and imbalance between participants as well asbeing able to identify in
which column more volume is being traded cancertainly be useful at certain times. There are
different types of footprint charting based on: ❖ The nature of the data: it can be set up with
time, range, volume and rotation candlesticks. ❖ The representation protocol: Profile, Delta,
Imbalance, Histogram, Ladder or BID/ASK. It is a very configurable tool that generally includes
multiplefunctionalities although it basically analyzes the orders executed by pricelevels with the
objective of looking for imbalances, takeovers, initiatives,unfinished auctions, clusters, big
trades etc. Once you know in depth how the order crossing is executed, youwill come to the
conclusion that its analysis is very subjective and thattrading based on this tool without taking
into account anything else is notadvisable. 4.4.2 DELTA A more specific and popular tool in the
world of Order Flowanalysis is the Delta. The delta is an indicator that simply measures
thedifference between the volume traded on the BID and the volume tradedon the ASK in a given period
of time. If the difference is positive the delta will be positive and vice versa if it is negative.
In addition, the differencebetween deltas can also be visualized since the indicators will
normallyshow them with different sizes. There is a common misconception that all volume traded on
theASK "are buys" and all volume crossed on the BID "are sells", althoughin reality with that
statement they mean that they are directional in origin;that is, they have an intention to add
pressure towards one of the sides. Ifthis were so, why do we sometimes see bearish moves with
positive deltasand bullish moves with negative deltas? Believe me it's not that simple. Ifit were,
we would have found the Holy Grail. Again it has to do with thecrossover mechanism.
[FIG 084]
For the time being, let's keep in mind that it is visually observed ona horizontal axis with value 0
and that depending on the column where thetransactions are executed, it will be displayed positively
or negatively onthe axis. This representation would be for the example of the normal Deltasince
there is another variant, the accumulated, where it is chartedcontinuously without taking into
account the horizontal axis. The delta is updated at each executed order and therefore gives riseto
the possibility that, as with the price, wicks are represented at itsextremes. If we observe a delta
with a wick in its lower part, what itmeans is that at a certain moment of its development the
difference infavor of the BID was extraordinarily large, and that at a certain point ithas begun to
negotiate much more actively in the ASK column,generating that reversal that leaves its mark in the
form of a wick. As it happens in general terms with the analysis of the footprint,although its
interpretation is not as basic as I have explained above, it canprovide us with certain usefulness
at certain specific moments.


---- SECTION bk2-c22 ----
RAW_LABEL: 4.5 THE ORDER FLOW PROBLEM
4.5 THE ORDER FLOW PROBLEM As a basis, we must be clear about a series of ideas that will help us
tounderstand the rest of the content: 1. A purchase is matched to a sale and vice versa. 2. An
aggressive order is matched with a passive order. 3. In the columns of the BID and the ASK only the
aggressivenessis reflected. Considering the different types of orders, it is now necessary
tounderstand what mechanism is used to match orders between participantsand in which column this
execution is reflected.
[FIG 085]
❖ Stop orders become Market orders when they are filled. ❖ Stop Limit orders become Limit orders
when the price set by the Stop order is reached. When the trader executes a Buy Market order, the
order processingmechanism kicks in and goes to the Order Book to find the first Sell Limitorder
located in the ASK column to match this buy. The same happens when a Sell Market order is executed.
Theprocessing mechanism directs that order to the most immediate price levelof the BID column to
find the counterpart in the Buy Limit orders that arepending to be matched there. With limit orders
the process is the same. A participant leaves hisorder pending execution in one of the two columns
and it will stay thereuntil an aggressive trader arrives who needs to match his order. This is
essentially what happens over and over again at high speed.Regardless of the type of order used to
enter the market, the end resultwill always be that an aggressive order will cross with a passive
one:
[FIG 086]
And the column on which those order crossovers will be displayedwill depend on the order that
initiated it. Therefore: ❖ Buy Market crosses with Sell Limit and is displayed in the ASK column,
since the order that initiated the transaction is theaggressive buy. ❖ Sell Market intersects with
Buy Limit and is shown in the BID column since the initiation comes from the aggressive sell side.
Now let's do a reasoning exercise using as an example a trader whoenters the market with a short
position (sell). This trader has differentways to exit this position:
[FIG 087]
❖ Through a manual exit, either in loss or in profit by executing a buy Market order (and it would
appear in the ASK). ❖ By executing the stop loss (stop loss), whose order will be a buy stop (and
would appear in the ASK). ❖ By executing the take profit, whose order is a buy limit (and would
appear in the BID). Similarly, a trader who enters the market with a long position (buy)can leave it
through three options:
[FIG 088]
❖ Through a manual exit, either at a loss or at a profit by executing a sell market order (and would
appear in the BID). ❖ By executing the stop loss, whose order will be a sell stop (and would appear
in the BID). ❖ By executing the take profit, whose order will be a sell limit (and would appear in
the ASK). The point of this example is that the same action, such as closing aposition, can be shown
in different columns (BID and ASK) depending onthe type of order used for it. Understanding this
information is of tremendous importancebecause many analyses of order crossing are erroneous because
they startfrom wrong premises. The first conclusion should therefore be that not everything
thatappears executed in the ASK column is buying with the intention of adding buying pressure to the
market and not everything that appears inthe BID column is selling with the intention of adding
selling pressure.Herein lies the problem when analyzing order flow in any of its variants. These
programs based on the order crossing mechanism are set upto always reflect aggressiveness, the
problem is that it is not possible todistinguish what intention is behind the executed orders. When
we see a cross executed in the ASK it will always be a BuyMarket with Sell Limit order; while when
we see a cross executed in theBID it will be a Sell Market with Buy Limit order, but what we will
notknow is the origin/intention behind such a cross order:
[FIG 089]
The main source of error when dealing with order flow analysiscomes because there is the belief that
everything executed in the ASK hasa buy initiative origin and everything executed in the BID has a
sellinitiative origin, but as we have just seen, nothing could be further fromthe truth. This type
of software makes a reduction to the execution ofaggressive orders with passive, but they cannot
know what theorigin/intention of those orders is. What would happen if there is a crossing of orders
of a Stop Loss of a Buy Market and a Take Profit of a Sell Limit? This type of crossoverwill be
reflected in the ASK, but is there really an intention to add buyingpressure to the market?
Obviously not, as we see in this example bothtraders would be out of the market and yet their
transaction would bereflected in the ASK. This is the problem with Order Flow: it remains ahighly
subjective tool. Even more so when you do not know perfectlyhow order crossing works.. The same
problem is encountered for the BID column. There couldbe the possibility of a matching of orders
from someone who has triggeredthe stop loss of a buy position (Sell Market) with someone who wants
totake profit from a sell position (Buy Limit). This crossover would bereflected in the BID but both
are out, there is no new selling pressure. I will now present two different contexts to exemplify
again theOrder Flow problem: 4.5.1 PROBLEM #1 PRICE DIVERGENCE For example, if we analyze the chart
of the footprint we see abullish development in which at the top there is an imbalance (greenbottom)
in favor of the ASK with a downward turn immediately after; thisfact offers us different
interpretations.
[FIG 090]
Some will say that they are trapped buyers (assuming thisimbalance in the ASK as aggressive buying
with directional intent); otherswill say that they are executions of stop loss orders of long
positions; stillothers will say that they are profit taking of long positions; and finallysome
others may say that it is a passive entry of sellers (takeover throughsell limit orders). All of
them are probably right. And the truth is that most probablythere is a bit of all of them. Also, at
that point most likely the delta isnegative, showing us a divergence. This is where the problem
becomes apparent when analyzing OrderFlow. The truth is that in real time we cannot determine
exactly what thetrue origin of these executions is. In many cases, in order to justify aproposed
scenario, one of these particular reasons will be alluded to. Forexample, someone who is looking for
a bearish move or who is alreadypositioned short will see those large orders executed on the ASK
andassume them to be "trapped buyers", as that is the reason that wouldjustify their bearish
approach. The only objective in this example is that, as it appears in the ASKcolumn, it is a cross
between Buy Market and Sell Limit orders; but to state categorically that it is any of the possible
origins already describeddoes not seem to be a very solid approach. Hence the importance that, in
the event of deciding to work withOrder Flow, the most logical thing to do would be to subordinate
itsanalysis to the context provided by another approach such as, in our case,the Wyckoff
methodology. The reason for this is that due to thecomplexity and nature of order matching we are
going to find this type ofimbalance in any part of the chart and this does not offer us an
advantage. 4.5.2 PROBLEM #2 DELTA DIVERGENCE What happens when the Delta is not in agreement with
the price? Ina positive Delta its candlestick is expected to be bullish; and in a negativeDelta,
bearish. Divergence would appear when we observe a negativeDelta on a bullish candlestick or a
positive Delta on a bearish candlestick.
[FIG 091]
If all that appears on the ASK were market buying with theintention of adding upward pressure, it is
impossible for a positive Deltato result in a bearish candlestick. Continuing with the same example
as above, we see that the bearishcandlestick that originates the turn has a very positive delta
(+235). The reasoning behind this situation could be as follows: Thepositive delta may be the result
of many aggressive buys (Buy Market)that have been blocked with passive sells (Sell Limit) and have
notallowed the price to rise. All these crossing orders appear in the ASK.Subsequently, if there is
little demand in the BID (few Buy Limits), a fewaggressive sales would cause the price to move
downwards. And this isone way in which a positive delta with a bearish candle would eventuallybe
observed.
[FIG 092]
As you have probably concluded, delta divergences implicitlyidentify a takeover so if they appear in
the right place they usuallyanticipate interesting turns. This does not mean by any means that
alldivergences will establish turns since sometimes these will occur over anarea of little interest
and without that intention of takeover behind, hencethe problem of its use arbitrarily. 4.5.3 PRICE
AND VOLUME TRADER In the end, our task as traders is to identify when imbalancesbetween supply and
demand occur and these will eventually show up onthe price and volume chart. A trader who only takes
into account the price and volume actionmay enter the market with some delay and may not have
certaininformation available (the real interaction between the participants) buthis trading will be
much calmer as he will not have to interpret those order crosses. In the previous example of price
divergence, the trader who simplyanalyzes the price action and volume will only focus on the fact
that ananomaly has occurred in that action, a divergence effort result. That largenumber of executed
orders will most likely be accompanied by anincrease in volume and a narrow range already denoting
some divergence.In addition, a subsequent downward turn would confirm this anomaly. Beyond assessing
whether there has been a jump of stops, profittaking, entry of short positions or that buyers have
been trapped, which aswe have already mentioned is probably a bit of all of the above, what
isrelevant is the final action and the trader who does not observe the flow oforders but knows how
to interpret the chart will eventually reach the sameconclusion, albeit with less stress. 4.5.4
CONCLUSION In addition to everything discussed with respect to order matching,it is the precise
moment to also recall the different types of agents thatoperate in the market and the intention
behind their actions (hedging,speculation and arbitrage). The orders executed by these participants
arealso displayed on the BID and ASK, and as we have seen, not all of themhave directional
intentions which are ultimately those seeking pricemovement. This is no small matter as the only
ones who will show up again todefend their position in case they have aggressively entered the
market seeking a profit from the price move will be the speculative traders. Wemay see the execution
of a large order at a price level and it may comefrom an institution with the objective of covering
a position held inanother parallel market, or it may be the activation of an arbitragestrategy, to
name a few possibilities. We therefore add a new layer of opacity and subjectivity. We haveon the
one hand that not all participants come to the market with aspeculative interest; and on the other
hand that the matching of orderscannot determine the origin of such trading. We come to the
conclusion therefore that the use of Order Flowindependently could be totally meaningless since in
no case can it offer uswhat is the most important aspect to determine in the market: the
context;knowing exactly where we are going to look for trades and in whichdirection. Trying to
understand this is vital in order to be able to performsolid analysis and scenario planning.

