==== PART bk2-p7 ====
RAW_LABEL: PART 7. WYCKOFF 2.0


---- SECTION bk2-c36 ----
RAW_LABEL: 7.1 CONTEXT ANALYSIS
7.1 CONTEXT ANALYSIS The first thing to do when analyzing any chart is to determine the contextin
which the price is: range or trend. Let's see a brief summary of thetrading possibilities depending
on the context:
[FIG 151]
In this chart we have an ideal accumulation scheme. We see howthe operating context offered by the
Wyckoff methodology convergeswith the operating principles by Volume Profile. Within the first three
trading opportunities at extremes (1) of therange context would fit with the principle of trading in
range by VolumeProfile. After the Spring the price recovers the value area and we see againthe
confluence of both principles: by Wyckoff methodology we wouldlook for a test to the top of the
structure while by Volume Profile we would activate the reversal trade where we would look for the
visit to theopposite end of the value area of the profile. This movement to theopposite end we would
be in a position to take advantage of it firstly onthe Spring and secondly if it leaves us a trading
opportunity inside (2),either on the potential test of the Spring or on a higher LPS. Profile we
would activate the scenario of continuation trading inwhich case we would do it on the end of the
value area, in this bullishexample on the Value Area High. When the price is already in the middle
of the trend movement wewould have to work with the context away from the value area (4) wherewe
would wait for some kind of pullback to look for the incorporation tothe current movement.
[FIG 152]
7.1.1 TRADING RANGE CONTEXT This is the construction of the cause of the subsequent trendmovement
which will be either upward or downward. This rotation phase can appear during the course of one or
several sessions (even weeks). If it contains several sessions it is best to pull avolume profile
together in order to identify the trading zones globally. 1. At extremes of the range. If we observe
the stop of theprevious trend movement and some subsequent lateralization,we will determine that we
are in a range context within anequilibrium zone and the trading here would be based on thesearch
for reversals at the extremes of the structure; i.e., buy lowand sell high. 2. Inside the range.
Inside the range. If we are in theinterior of a large range and we have enough space we can
alsoraise some trade looking for the extremes. This is especiallyadvisable when we have seen a
previous shock that provides uswith a clearer directional context. 7.1.2 TREND CONTEXT When a trend
is identified, the trader should only trade in favor of itwaiting for pullbacks to try to join the
market. 3. In trend interacting with the value zone if after beingsideways there is an inefficiency
that throws the price out of anequilibrium zone, we must evaluate the possibility that it is
aneffective break or a shock. If the previously analyzed footprintssuggest that it could be an
effective breakout, the operative herewill be based on the search for the confirmation test on
thebroken structure or at some more immediate trading level. 4. In trend away from the value zone.
Once confirmed theeffective rupture of the previous equilibrium zone, the price willnow be in a
trend context and the acceptance at these new levelswhere it is trading makes us base the trading in
favor of thisdirection. The question we must constantly be asking ourselves is in whatcontext the
market is currently in. Its answer will determine the type ofstrategy to apply. As we already know,
the only two conditions in whichthe market can be in e balance or in imbalance. So basically we are
goingto be working on range and trend trading. Next we are going to deepen in each of the operative
contexts: 7.1.3 TRADING RANGE We will mainly distinguish two scenarios within range tradingdepending
on the price in relation to the analyzed balancing zone: That the price is trading within a value
area suggests that thebalance is total between buyers and sellers. Neither of the two has controland
therefore the price is expected to continue to move in the same dynamic. The trading context here
would be to favor reversals at theextremes: ❖ By Wyckoff methodology it would be to seek entry into
the shakeout in Phase C. That is to say, if we are facing the upperpart of the structure we will
favor the Upthrust; while if we are inthe lower part we will look for the Spring. Its
genuinedevelopment will suggest the visit of the opposite end of thestructure. ❖ By Volume Profile
we would try to operate the reversal on the limits of the value area. We would therefore look for
the bearishturn over the Value Area High and the bullish turn over the ValueArea Low. A rejection
over such areas would suggest the visit ofthe opposite end of the value area. On the other hand, if
the range is wide enough some scenarioscould be posed inside it. By Wyckoff methodology, should we
observethat the price has possibly developed the test event in Phase C, it would bethe entry into
the trending move inside the range in Phase D. The onlynecessary filter would be that it had enough
available trajectories to offera good risk/reward ratio. In that case, we would need to be
positioned in favor of the moretrading levels the better. The fact that the price is able to reach
one of these levels and effectively break it will suggest that there is some controlby traders in
that direction. If we are also in favor of a High VolumeNode, we would already have identified the
bias of the market. Within a wide profile we will be able to identify different high andlow trading
zones. We must remember that the last High Volume Nodegenerated will determine the directional bias
at least in the short term. Aslong as the price remains above it, we will only consider bullish
scenariosand vice versa if it is below it. ❖ A High Volume Node is a lateralization of the price. By
pure logic, if we find ourselves above it, we can suggest that this HVNis an accumulation.
Therefore, to buy we want to be protectedwith an accumulation below it. ❖ The reverse is true for
distributions. If we are below a HVN it will be identified as a distribution, which makes us think
thatfavoring shorts would be the most appropriate. This type of trading inside the range will be
subject to necessarilymanage the position when reaching the extremes of the balancing zone,since in
principle we will have to continue favoring that none of the sideshas total control until the final
imbalance is provoked. Supported by the trading principles of Volume Profile, in the eventthat the
price comes from making a shock we would be in a context oftrading in reversal applying the adapted
rule of 80% where theprobability, after re-entering the value area is in the visit of the
oppositeextreme. 7.1.4 TRADING IN TREND After a movement of intentionality that breaks the balance
andwhere the analyzed traces suggest us that the imbalance is on one side orthe other, we will seek
to trade in favor of that direction waiting for a testat some relevant trading level. New
information has entered the market causing the imbalance andthe first thing to evaluate is that it
is not a failed breakout that generates ashakeout with re-entry back into the value zone. If the
traces suggest that it is an effective breakout, our bias nowshould be to look for some trading idea
in favor of that direction. ❖ Under Wyckoff methodology, if we see an impulsive move that
intentionally breaks the structure we would look for entry on thePhase D breakout test. ❖ This type
of trading is also useful for traders who do not trade structures. The logic is exactly the same.
Based on pure VolumeProfile analysis we could wait for the price to leave a certainvalue area and
wait for the entry in the test of the same, thiswould be the continuation trade under the trading
principles ofVolume Profile. To try to determine if we are indeed in front of a potential genuine
breakout we will analyze different footprints. It is time to recall thecontent seen in the section
How to distinguish between accumulation and distribution? As main traces to try to clarify if the
breakout will be genuine wewill take into account: 1. The shakeout. Key action, search for
liquidity. The deeper theshakeout, the stronger the scenario. Although local shakeoutssometimes
occur (on some high or low within the range), let'swait initially for the total shakeout as it gives
us greaterconfidence. 2. Price action and volume after the shakeout and at thebreakout. Candlesticks
with good displacement and highvolume denoting control by one side (buyers or sellers). At thetime
of the breakout, since we are facing a liquidity zone it islikely that relatively high volume will
appear and even visuallysome wicking will be observed. This is normal and should notinitially lead
us to think that it could be a shakeout sincetakeover behavior has this characteristic: high volume
and thepossibility of wicking. The key is what happens next. 3. The reaction after the breakout
looking for the non-reentryto the range. After the breakout of a value zone we must waitfor the
price to gain acceptance at those new levels where it willbe trading. This will initially be
evidenced by a sidewaysmovement in the market out of the range. A sign that would add further
strength to the acceptance scenariowould be to observe the migration of the VPOC to that new area or
the creation of a new one (perhaps that of a later session). This initiallyrepresents acceptance but
we would still have to wait to confirm theaction, as we saw in the section on VPOC migration. And
the final fingerprint is obtained by visualizing the non-reentryback into the value area, into the
range. At that point we will already havea change in the perception of value: price + time + volume
where theprobability would be in the continuation in favor of the breakoutmovement. It should be
noted that the time consumption after the breakoutshould not be excessive. Enough to generate a new
VPOC or itsmigration, but at the moment this happens the price should start the trendmovement. The
momentum behind the first imbalance should triggercontinuation with some alacrity. Once the price
manages to position itself and stay out of the valuearea we will determine that an imbalance has
occurred, that such a movehas not been rejected and therefore we will be in a position to look
forentry in favor of that direction. ❖ If we are in a potential bullish breakout, all the volume
seen below, as well as that previous balancing zone can now beidentified as a potential
accumulation. As we know, the effect ofan accumulation will be a bullish movement and this is where
wewant to be positioned. ❖ Conversely, when we find ourselves in a situation of a possible bearish
breakout, if the price is able to hold that zone and not re-enter the previous balancing area, we
will be able to identify such process as distributive and it will be the moment to look for
thetrigger with which to enter into a sell position to take advantageof the subsequent bearish
movement. We may begin to analyze a chart where the price is already out of acertain value area and
is moving in search of a new balancing zone. In thiscontext of trend movement, it is advisable to
wait for the development ofa test on one of the trading levels that we identify. At this point it is
convenient to remember Richard Wyckoff'steachings on how markets move. It is well known that markets
move inthe form of upward and downward waves: therefore, the scenarioproposed necessarily involves
waiting for this wave, which will becorrective in nature, before continuing in the direction of the
trendimbalance. The key now would be to identify possible zones over which towait for the price to
develop this corrective movement. The Wyckoffmethodology would be to look for entry into the trend
movement out ofthe Phase E range. It is a confusing context since this trading accordingto
methodology goes through the search for new intentionalitycandlesticks (SOS/SOWbar), minor
structures and new shakeouts(Ordinary Shakeout/Upthrust), but it does not suggest us the location
overwhich to expect the development of such behaviors. Here we see the importance of working with
these volume-basedtrading levels and zones. They help us determine clearer locations where it is
viable for price to go as well as offer us one more footprint to analyzethe health of the trend. The
ideal scenario, for example, would be to waitfor the development of a minor structure above the zone
where an tradinglevel such as the weekly VWAP or any other is located. A very interesting concept is
that we will continue to trade in favorof the last accumulation/distribution until the market
develops a structurein the opposite direction or until it loses the last identified value zone. In a
trending context we will point to the last relevant high volumezone that is supporting such a move.
That is, if we are in an uptrend wewill have very present the last high trading node (HVN) below the
currentprice and if we are in a downtrend we will have identified the last HVNjust above the price.
These nodes will ultimately determine the change inmarket control. Therefore, we will only pose a
counter-trend scenariowhen this zone is breached. To go deeper into this concept, review againthe
determination of the market bias through the analysis of the tradingzones seen in the section on
Volume Profile uses.


---- SECTION bk2-c37 ----
RAW_LABEL: 7.2 IDENTIFICATION OF TRADING ZONES AND LEVELS
7.2 IDENTIFICATION OF TRADING ZONES AND LEVELS Once we already know the context and have determined
what we want todo (buy or sell), the second has to do with where. This involvesidentifying the exact
location where we expect the price to develop ourentry trigger. The trading logic is exactly the
same for all contexts, profiles andtimeframes: identify the trading zones and levels and wait on
them for ourtrigger to confirm the imbalance and enter the market. Depending on the type of trading
you do, you can adapt these sameconcepts to your trading. ❖ If you are mainly an intraday trader,
you may use the profile of the previous session as a basis for scenario building and theprofile of
the current session as a support. ❖ If you are a longer term trader you may find it more interesting
to analyze the profile of the previous week as a basisto identify the trading zones; or a Composite
profile to coverweeks or months and to be able to identify the high and lowtrading zones; as well as
to take into account the VWAP of higher time frames such as weekly and monthly. ❖ If you trade
structures, it may be best to pull fixed profiles anchored to the working structures and set up
scenarios based ontheir trading zones. Or maybe what works best for you is to do a mix of all of
theabove. In the end each trader will have to do individual work to determinewhich way they feel
most comfortable as there is no universal rule aboutwhich profile to work with. The important thing
is that the concepts areexactly the same for different trading contexts. For this point it is useful
to be clear that completed profiles have ahigher relevance than profiles in progress. By pure logic,
a profile that isstill under development is susceptible to changes in its levels andtherefore the
importance that we can give to these decreases. On the otherhand, completed profiles ultimately
represent the final market consensusand their levels become more important. As to how much time
period Composite profiles should cover, thereis no general rule. You may want to consider the last
week, the currentweek, the last month, the current month or the current year. Here younecessarily
have to decide on a discretionary basis. There is no one profilebetter than another and it is
therefore the trader's job to determine whichone to work with. What is recommended is that these
profiles coversufficient price action both above and below the current price in order tobe able to
identify key trading areas, primarily high and low volumenodes. The search for the trigger to enter
will therefore be madeexclusively on the zones already indicated, distinguishing between: ❖ Trading
zones of structures under Wyckoff methodology. ❖ Trading zones: HVN and LVN. ❖ Trading levels: VAH,
VAL, VPOC and VWAP. Depending on the trading context, we will favor waiting on one orthe other
levels: This is the classic Wyckoff trade in the area of potential shakeoutof the highs/lows of the
structure. Tradable the shakeout itself as a moreaggressive entry and the test of the shakeout as a
more conservative entry. ❖ VAH/VAL. Taking into account the Volume Profile trading levels we will
also be in a position to look for reversal over theextremes of the value area, which will sometimes
coincide withthe extremes of the structure. Range trading. Always taking into account that we should
be in favor of a HighVolume Node and with enough distance we will wait for the price over: LVN. Low
Volume Nodes by their very nature establishexcellent areas over which to look for potential
opportunities. In this context the ideal will be to identify such areas through aprofile that covers
the entire range. VWAP and VPOC. Either that of the current session for moreintraday traders or that
of a profile covering several of them forstructure traders. These are the levels that determine the
controlof the market so we will wait for the price to produce theeffective break above them and we
will look for the first entry totest them. Sometimes the price after producing such a break will not
leave anytest and the momentum will quickly move the price so that a moreaggressive entry would
occur after producing the movement ofintentionality that breaks these levels. After the beginning of
the imbalance and having already evaluatedthe possibility of continuity of the movement we will wait
for a pullbackto assess the entry on: ❖ Level of the broken structure. For the structure trader this
is another of Wyckoff's classic entries: Entry to the test after abreakout. Initially we will wait
for the price in the area of thebroken Creek/Ice, which by its very nature will be a Low VolumeNode.
Out of the corner of our eye we will also be watching thenearby trading levels so as not to rule out
entry in case the pricegoes for any of these, mainly the extreme of the value area. ❖ Extremes of
the value area. The intraday trader or one who simply does not operate taking into account
structures couldvalue the entry after leaving a certain value area (for example thatof the current
session) and wait for the price to test the extremesof its Value Area to enter. Continuation
trading. ❖ VPOC of the range. It will be the last trading level above which to wait for the pullback
after the breakout. If it is far awayfrom the broken end, it is advisable to put the scenario
inquarantine because at that point the price will have re-entered thevalue area and will already
have some depth. In this case andunder the trading principles of Volume Profile it would benecessary
to activate the type of of failed reversal trading thatmanages to recover the end of the value area.
Context of imbalance so we will already have in favor a HVN(accumulation/distribution). We should
expect some pullback at any trading level that the priceis at. If the first level is too close, it
is likely that it will look for the nextone to develop a pullback with some proportionality in
relation to theprevious momentum. ❖ Levels of the previous session profile. Generally, and due to
the fact that we are in a trend context, the levels that the price willfind before will correspond
to those of the previous session(Value Area, VWAP and VPOC extremes). As the day unfolds, we may
also raise some scenario on the levels of the currentsession. ❖ Weekly VWAP. We will always be very
attentive to the location of the weekly VWAP as it is especially useful in thesetrend contexts to
look for the end of the pullback and thebeginning of a new impulsive movement. ❖ VPOC of the
previous impulse. In addition, we can pull a fixed profile of the last impulse of the price and have
located thelocation of its VPOC, as we already know that it is also a veryinteresting area on which
to wait for the price. ❖ LVN. It is interesting to identify the low volume zones within the context
we are trading. In this case we can use differentprofiles: composite to identify the general
context; profile of theprevious momentum and profile of previous sessions. For all contexts we will
want to trade in favor of the more tradinglevels the better. It is interesting to point out that the
zones of confluenceof trading levels are highly recommended to look for entries above
them,highlighting the combination of VPOC and VWAP.


---- SECTION bk2-c38 ----
RAW_LABEL: 7.3 SCENARIO PLANNING
7.3 SCENARIO PLANNING Once we have the context clear, we know the type of strategy we aregoing to
try to execute and we have identified the location on which towait for the entry trigger, it is time
to set the scenario. Normally the scenario to look for the entry trigger is going to becomposed of
one or two moves: The price will already be positioned in favor of our idea andtherefore we should
only wait for a simple action that will take the pricetowards the trading area. If based on the
context what we want is to buy, we will identify thetrading levels we have below where the price is
likely to go. If, on the other hand, once the analysis of the context is done, wedetermine that the
best option is to trade short, we will identify the mostimmediate trading levels above which to look
for the short entry trigger.
[FIG 153]
In this example we see that we are in a range context and in asituation of potential Spring, so the
scenario approach would be to waitfor a single movement to develop the test and look for the trigger
of entryin purchase. We may only want to buy or sell if certain price action occurs. If, based on
the analysis of the context, we want to buy, but theprice is below the trading zone, we should wait
for a first positioningmove above this zone and a second test move. Now we would be in aposition to
look for the entry trigger. The same would happen if we want to sell but the price is above
thetrading zone; in this case we should wait for a first movement of recoveryof the zone and a
second test movement. In this other example the reading we make is that we are in a rangecontext in
which the price comes from developing a potential Spring andhas serious possibilities that it is a
cumulative range.
[FIG 154]
At that precise moment and knowing the roadmap offered by themethodology we would be ready to wait
for the entry in purchase afterseeing the bullish breakout (1) plus the subsequent test (2). For
context wewant to buy but the price is not in an operationally attractive area (as it isgoing to
face the key area) so it is appropriate to propose a two-movescenario. As we know, the price could
leave in 1 an Upthrust and re-enter theprice back to the balancing zone, but initially we should be
directionallybiased to the upside after seeing that the downthrust and the breakoutbullish movement
meet the characteristics. The market obviously will not always follow our approach. A largenumber of
occasions we will see how we are forced to change sentimentbased on what the price is doing. This is
the key to continually analyzingthe reaction of participants as new information comes into the
market. The best way to approach this scenario-building process is through a continuous validation
protocol. This is about actively reacting to whatthe market does (If X, then maybe Y). This means
"If the price does this,then let's expect that". It is an optimal approach to know at all times
whatto expect the price to do and be prepared to act with the alacrity required. "If price breaks
Creek, then I'm going to wait for it to test to lookfor buys. If on the other hand there is a failed
breakout, then I'm going towait for a test in the opposite direction to enter short" The key here is
to assess all the possible options that the market candevelop and, even if we are initially
directionally biased to one side, weshould always also take into account an alternative scenario in
theopposite direction that allows us to make a quick change of bias ifnecessary.
[FIG 155]
An example is when the market faces the top of a structure. We arein an trading zone, in a situation
of potential bullish breakout or shakeout.It may be that by context we are directionally biased to
favor the bullishbreakout and that we are therefore looking for purchases to test thebreakout; but
when the time comes what we observe is that the price re-enters the range, strongly refusing to rise
and leaves what looks like abullish jerk (Upthrust). At that point we should have enough capacity
toread this in real time and change the scenario approach to look for theshort.


---- SECTION bk2-c39 ----
RAW_LABEL: 7.4 TRADING MANAGEMENT
7.4 TRADING MANAGEMENT While it is true that the most important element of this combination
isundoubtedly all that the Wyckoff methodology offers us, we have alreadyseen that the Volume
Profile and Order Flow tools can certainly be usefulwhen it comes to improving our scenario and
trading approaches. Thanks to the principles of the Wyckoff methodology, we will be ina position to
set up scenarios; thanks to the identification of the zones andtrading levels by Volume Profile we
will be able to refine with greateraccuracy where the price is most likely to go; and thanks to the
precisionof Order Flow it will allow us to further confirm and calibrate the entrytrigger. 7.4.1
ENTRY Regardless of the trading context, the market entry trigger willalways be an action that
denotes intentionality on the part of the largetrader in favor of our direction. For pure price
action analysis we will continue to work with thesignificant candlesticks: ❖ Sign of Strength bar
(SOSbar). Wide range bullish candlestick with close in the upper third and relatively high volume. ❖
Sign of Weakness bar (SOWbar). Wide range bearish candlestick with close in the lower third and
relatively highvolume. For those who want to observe the Order Flow I would onlyrecommend working
with the concepts already explained: ❖ Turning pattern: absorptions and initiatives. ❖ Continuation
pattern: controls and tests. In essence what we would look for in the turning pattern would beto
confirm that the SOS/SOWbar carries initiative; and in case of losingthe initial trigger we could
look for a re-entry in the continuation pattern.
[FIG 156]
ENTRY ORDER As we saw in the section on order types, participants can enter themarket in different
ways, basically with Market, Stop or Limit orders. In our case we are going to use Stop orders.
Remember that theseare placed above the current price if we want to buy; and below thecurrent price
if we want to sell. With the development of the significant candle we have an obvioussign of
interest, but it is interesting to use Stop orders as a definitive filterthat suggests some
continuity in the movement initiated with the triggercandle. Sometimes we will see the development
of what initially looks likea candle of intentionality and just after its closing the price
reversessharply in the opposite direction. What has happened is that internally atakeover process
has taken place at all these price levels and traders withgreater capacity were positioning
themselves on the opposite side. Byusing this type of order, although it is true that we are not
saved from thispotential situation, in many occasions where this is happening, it willprevent us
from entering the market. If we are really facing an imbalanced movement, this will have astrong
momentum where it will continue to push in favor of that direction.With this type of limit order we
will be entering in favor of themomentum, of the imbalance. In any case this section should be
evaluated more in depth by thetrader. It may be preferable to enter with a market order after the
closingof the trigger candle, after seeing an aggression in the track withoutwaiting for the closing
of the candle or even use a limit order to enter on a possible pullback. Either option could be
valid. Simply because you would be betting that the move you expect isgoing to happen, and if you
remember, we are dealing in an environmentof total uncertainty so we don't know what is going to
happen.
[FIG 157]
For example, you might see a chart in a potential Spring situation.If the analysis is correct, we
know that the roadmap offered by themethodology goes through the search for at least the top of the
structure;so maybe you think it is a good option to place a Buy Limit entry orderwaiting for the
Spring test to develop. But such a test may never take place and instead the price willcontinue to
fall, confirming that our analysis was not correct, which would cause us to add a loss. The problem
is not in taking that loss, sinceit is part of the business, but rather that the basic approach was
not themost solid.
[FIG 158]
At the point where you see the Spring potential and place the BuyLimit, you are betting that the
price will develop two movements: thebearish movement to generate the test and the bullish one that
will takethe price to the top of the range. And the key is that we can only proposethe development
of one movement. In this case, we could initially propose the bearish movement as atest since we are
in a potential Spring position; and once the price reachesthe area where it "should" turn, we have
to analyze again the price actionand the volume to see if the imbalance that generates the bullish
turnoccurs and then we can propose the next bullish movement up to theCreek. The underlying idea is
that we must make a continuous analysis ofthe interaction between buyers and sellers; and even if we
aredirectionally biased to one side based on the context, we must confirmwhen the time comes that
the approach is solid and that the market itselfconfirms it. If in a potential Spring test position
we see that aggressive buyersappear and push the price up, this is the footprint we would need to
see toconfirm that our analysis appears to be correct and in such a case wouldoffer us an trading
opportunity. It should also be remembered that seeingour entry trigger above the proposed zone has
nothing to do with whetherthat trade then turns out in profit or loss. As we have already seen,
newinformation is constantly entering the market and this could changeparticipants' perception of
the security at any time. 7.4.2 STOP LOSS From a pure Wyckoff methodology point of view we will
continueto recommend placing the stop loss on the other side of the significantcandlesticks (SOS/SOW
bar) and structures. The logic is that if largetraders have actively entered these developments they
will defend theirposition in case the price goes against them. Additionally, we will always want to
place the stop loss on theother side of the more levels and trading zones the better. The first zone
we will be looking for will be a low volume node(LVN). As we have already mentioned, by its very
nature this low trading zone is likely to act as a rejection and that is exactly what we are
lookingfor: that in case the price reaches this zone it will cause a V-turn and thatthis rejection
will protect our position. It must be taken into account that the other way of representing
therejection is that the price quickly crosses those price levels. If so, it wouldsurely reach and
execute our protective stop. As we do not know whatmay happen, we must necessarily use this type of
zone with the initialpremise that the type of rejection it represents in a possible future visit
isthat of the V-turn. The logic of using the rest of the operating levels protecting theposition
basically lies in the fact that a high amount of volume will betraded on them and could also act as
levers that cause a turn in the price.Some might think that if these levels act as magnets due to
the liquiditythat is located on them, why use them to protect the position? If we arebought and we
have them below, based on the principle that they act asmagnets, wouldn't it be logical to think
that the price will go looking forthem? The logic here is that at the moment of entry we are working
infavor of a price imbalance looking for its continuity. And therefore it isthe moment when the
price will move away from such levels thatgenerally represent equilibrium and acceptance by all. If
at the moment oftruth the imbalance is not such, we still have the possibility of saving theposition
if at these levels participants that turn the market re-enter.
[FIG 159]
If we are in a potential Spring situation and we see the appearanceof a SOSbar, we would be in a
position to enter the market with a BuyStop order at the breakout above the candle leaving the Stop
Loss locationeither below the trigger candle itself (#1) or below the entire structure(#2). At
either of these two points the Stop Loss would be protected firstby the imbalances generated in the
trigger candle; by any VWAP that hasbeen generated, and by the Value Area Low of the structure's
profilewhich in essence is the Low Volume Node.
[FIG 160]
In this bearish example, if the SOWbar appears offering us theshort entry trigger, we would place
the Sell Stop order below its low andwe would also have several locations for the Stop Loss: just
above its high(#1), at the highest high generated in the turn (#2) and on the other side ofthe VPOC
of the profile (#3). We would be protected by the candle itself, by some VWAP and bythe Value Area
Low of the profile that besides being a Low Volume Nodein this case coincides as the ICE (support)
of the structure. It would be necessary to make a point with respect to the VPOC ofthe profile. In
this example we have it a little further away but it is still arelevant level to take into account.
The trader should analyze if placingthe stop at that level would still have an acceptable
Risk:Reward ratio. This is one of the peculiarities of discretionary approaches and thatis that we
must adapt to market behavior. Sometimes all the levels willconverge in a very narrow range giving
us greater confidence; while othertimes they will certainly be separated and we must evaluate
whichlocation is more optimal and if the risk is worth it. 7.4.3 TAKE PROFIT In my first book "The
Wyckoff Methodology in Depth" I alreadylisted the possible actions we could use to make profits. We
mainly talkedabout: 1. Climatic bar evidence. Especially useful when we do not haveany reference to
the left of the chart. 2. After the development of the Phase A stop of the previous trendmovement.
3. In liquidity zones generated by relevant price turns (previoushighs and lows). Thanks to the
addition of the Volume Profile we can add a newobjective way even more useful when we have price
trading in thedirection where we want to take profits: It is about using the High Volume Nodes that
we have in thedirection of the trade. We already know the magnetic nature of such areasand it is
therefore that they provide us with some confidence to use themas targets. Supported by the auction
theory, after an imbalance the market willlook to find traders with the opposite bias who are
willing to trade again.This is why the price will move to those areas where there was previouslyhigh
trading as the same thing is expected to happen again. Very important to remember again the short
term mentality of themarket where the last trading areas will have a higher relevance in termsof
price attraction than the older areas. The concept of High Volume Node when setting the target could
besomewhat ambiguous. The HVN is an area, and the order to take profit isa specific price level,
Where exactly to place it? For this purpose it is veryinteresting to take into account the VPOC of
that particular value zone.The HVN serves us to identify the probable price visit zone and its
VPOCfor the exact location of the target. For a more intraday trading it can be extremely useful to
haveidentified the Developing Volume Point of Control (DVPOC). These are price levels that were at
one point in time the VPOC for a session,whether or not they were the final VPOC for that session.
As we know,the VPOC of the session is changing based on the negotiations that takeplace, and this
level represents that footprint of change. In short, what weare dealing with is a level of high
trading and therefore most likely tohave some magnetic behavior.
[FIG 161]
In this example we see how the price distributes in this profile inthe form of P and the bearish
development is going to look for an oldDVPOC below (1) to turn back from there in the form of V to
go to testagain another DVPOC of the current session above (2). It should be noted that we only take
into account those DVPOCsthat have not been tested. In this example we see other DVPOCs that
havealready been tested and therefore would not be valid for target setting, aswould be case 3. The
same would be true for naked VPOCs. We have not discussedthis level before because its usefulness is
focused almost exclusively as apossible target level. Naked VPOCs are VPOCs from previous
sessionsthat have not been tested. Unlike DVPOCs, naked VPOCs were the finalVPOC of the session.
There are statistics that claim that VPOCs from previous sessions are tested in the following days
with a high probability.That is why they are very interesting to take into account. In the following
example we see the magnetism exerted by theselevels attracting the price and even generating a
subsequent turn. In both charts different configurations have been used to visualizespecifically one
or the other level (DVPOC and nakedVPOC). It isrecommended to use both since by their very nature
they both representprevious high trading zones.
[FIG 162]
7.4.4 WHAT TO DO WHEN THE PRICE GOES WITHOUT US? Sometimes we will have to see how even having made
a goodscenario approach the price initiates the movement we were looking forwithout us, having had
the possibility of entering the market. If there is something that is not recommended is to enter
bymomentum guided by some kind of negative sentiment to have lost themovement. Entering in
desperation is generally not a good strategy in thelong run. If the price goes without us absolutely
nothing happens, it is partof the game just like stop loss jumps. If the underlying idea has
notchanged, we can continue to look for entry in new trading zones. It is much more interesting to
make another type of constructivereading in this situation, such as that you have made a good
analysis. While it is true that we approach the market with the ultimate goalof obtaining
profitability from its movements, the fact of being right in theanalysis should already be a reason
to be certainly satisfied. The reading is that your analysis of who was in control of themarket and
what was the most likely move was good and this istremendously important as an example that
ultimately the knowledge isinternalized and that by following that line it is a matter of time
before theresults appear. The only thing that has failed is either the exact visit to the areawhere
you expected the price to be; or that the price has not left a genuinetrigger to generate the
sending of the orders. In any case, it is necessary toremember that we have absolutely no control
over the market and that ourtask is to set up scenarios with the highest possible probability. Also,
we must also keep in mind that, having as one of the mainrules the conservation of capital, you may
not have taken advantage of the movement you expected but at least you were not positioned on the
wrongside of the market and therefore you do not add any losses.

